Urgent action needed to reinforce breast cancer control measures in Africa: WHO report.
Brazzaville – An estimated 135 000 women could lose their lives to breast cancer by 2040 in sub-Saharan Africa if urgent actions are not taken to reverse the trends, a new World Health Organization (WHO) report finds.
The WHO study assessed breast cancer control capacities in 42 of the 47 countries within the African region, focusing on six critical areas: leadership, governance and financing, health workforce, health information systems, and service delivery. The assessment revealed significant gaps and disparities in breast cancer control across the region highlighting critical shortage of healthcare workers essential for prevention, diagnosis, and treatment, as well as limited access to specialized cancer centres, hinderingprogress toward the Global Breast Cancer Initiative (GBCI) goals.
The analysis finds that only 5 out of 47 countries in the region have established organized breast cancer screening programmes with many countries still relying on opportunistic screening programmes. Access to pathology in Africa remains limited, with only two countries meeting the standard of one lab per 100 000 people.
Breast cancer-related deaths in the region are largely driven by late diagnosis and insufficient prevention and care measures. In 2022 alone, 38 out of every 100 000 women were diagnosis with breast cancer and 19 per 100 000 tragically lost their lives to the disease.
To enhance breast cancer care in the region, the WHO report underscores the urgent need for investment in leadership, governance and financing as fundamental steps. Strengthening these elements will pave the way for advancements in strategic planning, healthcare infrastructure, workforce training and, most importantly, equitable access to essential services.
The report calls countries to develop and adequately fund comprehensive National Cancer Control Plans, providing a strategic framework for coordinated national efforts to combat breast cancer effectively.
To address the severe shortage of cancer care healthcare professionals, WHO advocates for the expanding and enhancement of oncology training programs. Building a well-equipped workforce is essential to ensuring high-quality cancer prevention, diagnosis, and treatment services. Beyond workforce development, the report highlights the urgent need for organized breast cancer screening and early diagnosis programmes in countries. Ensuring these programs are accessible to all women in the region is crucial, as early detection significantly improves treatment outcomes and survival rates.
Read the report here
WHO accelerates efforts to support response to Sudan virus disease outbreak in Uganda .
Brazzaville/Kampala – Following the confirmation of an outbreak of Sudan virus disease – which belongs to the same family as Ebola virus disease – in Uganda today, World Health Organization (WHO) is mobilizing efforts to support the national health authorities to swiftly contain and end the outbreak.
WHO is deploying senior public health experts and mobilizing staff from the country office to support all the key outbreak response measures. In addition, the Organization has allocated US$ 1 million from its Contingency Fund for Emergencies to help accelerate early action, and is readying medical supplies, including personal protective equipment to deliver to Uganda from its Emergency Response Hub in Nairobi.
While there are no licensed vaccines for the Sudan virus disease, WHO is coordinating with developers to deploy candidate vaccines as an addition to the other public health measures. The vaccines will be deployed once all administrative and regulatory approvals are obtained.
So far one confirmed case – a nurse from Mulago National Referral Hospital in the capital Kampala – has been reported. No other health workers or patients have shown symptoms of the disease.  A total of 45 contacts, including health workers and family members of the confirmed case (deceased) have been identified and are currently under close monitoring. The identification of the case in a densely populated urban requires rapid and intense response.
“We welcome the prompt declaration of this outbreak, and as a comprehensive response is being established, we are supporting the government and partners to scale up measures to quicky identify cases, isolate and provide care, curb the spread of the virus and protect the population,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “Uganda’s robust expertise in responding to public health emergencies will be crucial in ending this outbreak effectively.”
There have been eight previous outbreaks of the Sudan virus disease, with five occurring in Uganda and three in Sudan. Uganda last reported an outbreak of Sudan virus disease in 2022.
“Banking on the existing expertise, we are accelerating all efforts, including expertise, resources and tools to save lives and bring the outbreak to a halt swiftly,” said Dr Kasonde Mwinga, WHO Representative in Uganda.
Sudan virus disease is a severe, often fatal illness affecting humans and other primates that is due to Orthoebolavirus sudanense (Sudan virus), a viral species belonging to the same genus of the virus causing Ebola virus disease.  Case fatality rates of Sudan virus disease have varied from 41% to 100% in past outbreaks. There are no approved treatments or vaccines for Sudan virus. Early initiation of supportive treatment has been shown to significantly reduce deaths from Sudan virus disease.

Communications Associate WHO Uganda
Tanzania confirms outbreak of Marburg virus disease .
Dodoma – Tanzania today confirmed an outbreak of Marburg virus disease in the northwestern Kagera region after one case tested positive for the virus following investigations and laboratory analysis of suspected cases of the disease.
President of the Republic of Tanzania, Her Excellency Samia Suluhu Hassan, made the announcement during a press briefing alongside World Health Organization (WHO) Director-General, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, in the country’s administrative capital Dodoma.
“Laboratory tests conducted at Kabaile Mobile Laboratory in Kagera and later confirmed in Dar es Salaam identified one patient as being infected with the Marburg virus. Fortunately, the remaining suspected patients tested negative,” the president said. “We have demonstrated in the past our ability to contain a similar outbreak and are determined to do the same this time around.”
A total of 25 suspected cases have been reported as of 20 January 2025, all of whom have tested negative and are currently under close follow-up, the president said. The cases have been reported in Biharamulo district in Kagera.
“We have resolved to reassure the general public in Tanzania and the international community as a whole of our collective determination to address the global health challenges, including the Marburg virus disease,” said H.E President Hassan.
WHO is supporting Tanzanian health authorities to enhance key outbreak control measures including disease surveillance, testing, treatment, infection prevention and control, case management, as well as increasing public awareness among communities to prevent further spread of the virus.
“WHO, working with its partners, is committed to supporting the government of Tanzania to bring the outbreak under control as soon as possible, and to build a healthier, safer, fairer future for all the people of Tanzania,” said Dr Tedros. “Now is a time for collaboration, and commitment, to protecting the health of all people in Tanzania, and the region, from the risks posed by this disease.”
Marburg virus disease is highly virulent and causes haemorrhagic fever. It belongs to the same family as the virus that causes Ebola virus disease. Illness caused by Marburg virus begins abruptly. Patients present with high fever, severe headache and severe malaise. They may develop severe haemorrhagic symptoms within seven days.
“The declaration by the president and the measures being taken by the government are crucial in addressing the threat of this disease at the local and national levels as well as preventing potential cross-border spread,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “Our priority is to support the government to rapidly scale up measures to effectively respond to this outbreak and safeguard the health of the population,”
Tanzania previously reported an outbreak of Marburg in March 2023 – the country’s first – in Kagera region, in which a total of nine cases (eight confirmed and one probable) and six deaths were reported, with a case fatality ratio of 67%.
In the African region, previous outbreaks and sporadic cases have been reported in Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Equatorial Guinea, Rwanda, South Africa and Uganda.
Marburg virus is transmitted to people from fruit bats and spreads among humans through direct contact with the bodily fluids of infected people, surfaces and materials. Although several promising candidate medical countermeasures are currently undergoing clinical trials, there is no licensed treatment or vaccine for effective management or prevention of Marburg virus disease. However, early access to treatment and supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms, improve survival.
WHO support for Tanzania’s response to suspected Marburg virus disease outbreak.
Brazzaville – Following reports of suspected cases of viral haemorrhagic fever in Tanzania, World Health Organization (WHO) has enhanced its readiness to support the government as it takes measures to investigate and respond swiftly to the situation.
The national health authorities have deployed a team of experts to Kagera region, in the north-west of the country, where the suspected cases have been reported. WHO is mobilizing technical expertise and logistical supplies to support these ongoing efforts. Early notification of the outcome of the investigation is crucial in facilitating swift response.
“We stand ready to support the government in its efforts to investigate and ensure that measures are in place for an effective and rapid response,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “With the existing national capacities built from response to previous health emergencies, we are able to swiftly scale up efforts to protect communities as well as play our advocacy role for international support and solidarity.”
WHO does not recommend any travel and trade restrictions with Tanzania at this time.
Tanzania previously reported an outbreak of Marburg in March 2023 – the country’s first – in Kagera region. Strong measures enabled the outbreak to be controlled and declared over in less than two months.
Marburg virus disease is highly virulent and causes haemorrhagic fever. It belongs to the same family as the virus that causes Ebola virus disease. Illness caused by Marburg virus begins abruptly. Patients presents with high fever, severe headache and severe malaise. They may develop severe haemorrhagic symptoms within seven days.
The virus is transmitted to people from fruit bats and spreads among humans through direct contact with the bodily fluids of infected people, surfaces and materials. Although several promising candidate medical countermeasures are currently undergoing clinical trials, there is no licensed treatment or vaccine for effective management or prevention of Marburg virus disease. However, supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms, improve survival.
In the African region, previous outbreaks and sporadic cases have been reported in Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Equatorial Guinea, Rwanda, South Africa and Uganda.
Marburg outbreak in Rwanda declared over.
Kigali, Rwanda – The outbreak of Marburg Virus Disease was declared over today by the Government of Rwanda with no new cases reported over the last 42 days after the last patient tested negative for the virus twice, as per the usual protocol for ending these types of outbreaks.
The outbreak, confirmed on 27 September 2024, was the first Marburg Virus Disease outbreak Rwanda has experienced. A total of 66 confirmed cases and 15 deaths were recorded. Almost 80% of the cases were among health workers who were infected while providing clinical care to their colleagues and other patients.
To halt the spread of the virus and save lives, Rwandan health authorities, with support from World Health Organization (WHO) and partners, mounted a comprehensive response, with a large range of measures from disease surveillance, testing, infection prevention and control, contact tracing, to clinical care and public awareness. These actions helped to curb the spread of the outbreak, with cases halved between weeks two and three after detection and declining by around 90% thereafter.
“The robust response by Rwanda shows how committed leadership, concerted efforts by partners and a strong health system are crucial in addressing public health emergencies, saving and protecting lives as well as safeguarding the health of individuals and communities,” said Dr Brian Chirombo, WHO Representative in Rwanda.
The deployment of WHO experts, a team of national first responders from other countries in the region and the strong mobilization of national efforts were instrumental in enhancing the outbreak response. The last confirmed case received their second negative PCR results on 7 November, kicking off the 42-day countdown to declaring the end of the outbreak, as per WHO recommendation.
WHO continues to work closely with the national authorities to maintain critical measures to ensure swift detection and response in case of any flare-up or new spillover of the virus. WHO will continue to support the Ministry of Health to implement and sustain a holistic care programme for people who recovered from Marburg Virus Disease to help them overcome any after-effects they may experience.
The virus which causes Marburg, is in the same family as the virus that causes Ebola Virus Disease. It is highly virulent with a fatality rate ranging from 24% to 88%. In this outbreak, the fatality rate was on the lower end, at around 23%. Marburg virus is transmitted to people from fruit bats and spreads among humans through direct contact with the bodily fluids of infected people, surfaces and materials.
UHC Day: High health-care costs in Africa continue to push over 150 million into poverty: new WHO report.
Brazzaville - On Universal Health Coverage Day, a new report by the World Health Organization (WHO) Regional office for Africa finds that most African countries continue to rely heavily on out-of-pocket payments[1] (or out-of-pocket health spending) to fund their health services, and urges countries to reduce the financial strains that high health-care costs place on their population.
The practice of out-of-pocket payments, warns the report, continues to: place a financial burden on over 200 million people, including pushing over 150 million people into or deeper into poverty (latest data, from 2019) across the WHO Africa Region; exact a heavy price on people’s health; and hamper progress in attaining universal health coverage.
In fact, globally, half of all people impoverished because of out-of-pocket payments live in Africa – a rising and worrying trend.
“Having to pay for medicines and other health-care costs out of their own pocket can instantly bend the trajectory of someone’s life toward financial hardship and ill health. Such payments force many people to spend less on other basic needs such as food, housing and utilities, which, in turn, may worsen their conditions. This also creates a major barrier for the poorest and the most vulnerable who cannot get, as a result, the care they need,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO’s Regional Director for Africa.
“Despite countries’ efforts to build more sustainable health financing systems, more needs to be done so that people across Africa have access to the quality health services they need, when and where they need them, without having to fall into financial hardship,” added Dr Moeti.
Between 2000 and 2019, the period analysed by the report, the number of people making ‘catastrophic’ out-of-pocket payments (i.e. spending over 10% of their household budget on medicines and other health-care costs) rose every year by 2.5 million people (from 52 million in 2000 to 95 million in 2019).
That said, progress, albeit at a slower pace than globally, has been made during the same period, with the overall number of people pushed into or deeper into poverty because of out-of-pocket payments having halved between 2000 and 2019.
A look at the report’s key data and findings in detail
How is the report useful?
The report, the only one of its kind, helps countries track progress on financial protection in health and make evidence-based decisions to accelerate efforts to attain universal health coverage.
The report highlights good practices by several countries to address the burden of out-of-pockets payments by, for example, abolishing patients’ fees at the point of care, introducing health insurance schemes, and progressively increasing reliance on government-funded health services.
“I hope this report will strengthen countries’ resolve to improve financial protection in health for their populations and to invest in better data generation, analysis and use to inform better decision-making,” said Dr Moeti.
The WHO Regional Office for Africa supports the 47 Member States to track progress in financial protection in health by building the capacity of ministries of health and statistics offices; facilitating evidence-led decision-making by reporting progress and challenges–as in this report; and providing technical support to redesign policies to improve financial protection in health.
[1] Out-of-pocket health spending includes formal and informal expenses directly related to the cost of seeking care. It excludes prepayment (for example, taxes, contributions or premiums) and reimbursement of the household by a third party such as the government, a health insurance fund or a private insurance company. It also excludes indirect expenses (such as non-emergency transportation costs) and the opportunity cost of seeking care (for example, lost income). But it includes any spending incurred by a household when any member uses a health good or service to receive any type of care (preventive, curative, rehabilitative or long-term care), provided by any type of provider, for any type of disease, illness or health condition, in any type of setting (for instance, outpatient, inpatient or at home).

Sierra Leone launches Ebola vaccination drive for frontline health workers.
Freetown – Sierra Leone launched a nationwide Ebola vaccination campaign this week to protect 20 000 health workers, traditional healers, community health personnel and other frontline workers. The campaign comes a decade after the devastating 2014–2016 Ebola outbreak in West Africa.
The vaccination campaign, using the ERVEBO vaccine and being rolled out with support from Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, World Health Organization (WHO) and the International Coordinating Group on Vaccine Provision partners, seeks to safeguard the nation’s healthcare workers while strengthening preparedness for future outbreaks.
The campaign is targeting 16 districts in the country to vaccinate healthcare workers, traditional healers, community health and social workers, laboratory personnel, motorcycle taxi drivers and security forces that will be involved in any future outbreak response. Nearly 4000 people, including around 280 health workers, died in Sierra Leone during the 2014–2016 Ebola outbreak.
The ERVEBO vaccine, has globally been administered to more than 500 000 people and provides close to 100% protection against the Ebola virus.
“This campaign is crucial for reducing the risks healthcare workers face when treating undiagnosed cases of Ebola. By vaccinating these frontline workers, we can potentially break chains of transmission and prevent outbreaks from escalating,” said Dr George Ameh, WHO Representative in Sierra Leone.
WHO, UNICEF and other partners are supporting the vaccination campaign by providing technical expertise, logistical coordination, and monitoring systems.
Sierra Leone, one of the hardest-hit countries during the West Africa Ebola outbreak, has used the lessons learned to bolster its health systems and outbreak response mechanisms. With this vaccination campaign, the country aims to create a strong barrier against the resurgence of Ebola and create a robust epidemic preparedness.
In addition to the targeted vaccination of healthcare workers, mechanisms are in place to rapidly deploy vaccines to the public in the event of an outbreak. A global stockpile of Ebola vaccines, managed by the International Coordinating Group is set to ensure timely delivery, enabling swift responses.
Enhanced control measures helping to control mpox outbreak in Africa.
Brazzaville – More than 13 000 laboratory-confirmed mpox cases have been reported in the African region since the start of 2024, as of 17 November. Three countries – Burundi, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Uganda - account for approximately 97% of all reported cases so far this year.
From reinforcing outbreak control measures including health worker training, to the delivery of medical supplies and equipment, and to the development of vaccine deployment plans, World Health Organization (WHO) is providing critical technical and financial support to countries to effectively respond to and end the mpox outbreaks in the region.
While much of the focus has been on those countries whose populations are at higher risk of exposure to mpox due to larger outbreaks, WHO is also supporting countries experiencing sporadic cases. With WHO support most countries in the region that have been affected by mpox this year have successfully prevented a small number of isolated cases from spreading more widely among their populations and taking on epidemic proportions.
By the time Ghana reported its first mpox case of the year on 1 October 2024 – a junior high school student in the Western North region - public awareness of the virus was already elevated due to weeks of risk communication and community engagement through WHO-sponsored social media campaigns.
Recognition of the symptoms meant that both the student and his mother, who was subsequently infected, were promptly taken to medical facilities for treatment and made full recoveries without infecting other members of the community. Rapid contact tracing and testing were conducted to ensure that the virus had not spread beyond the household, early actions that helped contain the disease.
To strengthen the response, WHO is working closely with the Ghana Health Service to increase public awareness even further. Police and immigration officials at key points of entry have also received training on how to recognize the signs of mpox to prevent the virus being imported into the country.
“Mobilizing resources to support risk communication and community engagement is just one pillar of our mpox response, but it has so far proven critical; Ghana has registered just two cases in 2024. Without informed populations there is a risk that infected people will carry on as normal, passing the virus on to those around them,” said Dr Frank Lule, Acting WHO Representative in Ghana.
Gabon—which alongside South Africa, Guinea, Cameroon and Congo is assessed to no longer be experiencing active community transmission of mpox—provides another example of how early interventions can yield significant benefits. The country reported its first laboratory-confirmed mpox case on 22 August. A 30-year-old man who had travelled to Uganda and returned with fever, fatigue and a skin rash. After seeking medical attention, he was isolated until full recovery and an extensive contact tracing operation was launched by WHO-trained health workers. One of the contacts identified was a 25-year-old IT worker living to the north of Libreville.
“As a contact, rigorous protocol was put in place to ensure my safety and the safety of those around me. I was told to watch out for symptoms like fever, fatigue or lesions and to immediately contact the surveillance teams should these symptoms develop. They also asked me to limit social interactions and close physical contact,” explained Axel Mouketou.
“The surveillance teams remained in close contact with me, conducting visits and calling me on the phone to evaluate my health. This regular contact helped me feel supported and gave me the chance to ask any questions to better understand what actions I should take,” he said.
WHO has also provided personal protective equipment and other medical supplies to the Ministry of Health; installed thermal cameras at multiple points of entry to Gabon; trained 72 officials at points of entry—including police officers, customs workers and health workers—to recognise mpox symptoms and isolate patients; and provided technical guidance to key ministerial officials. These measures have helped limit the number of lab-confirmed mpox cases in 2024 to just two.
“Our main focus is to maintain surveillance, health training and community engagement once this epidemic is over,” said Dr Narcisse Tounaikok, WHO’s interim mpox Incident Manager in Gabon.
Similar contact tracing efforts were initiated in Guinea, after a seven-year-old child was confirmed to have been infected with the clade 2b subvariant of mpox on 2 September. Almost all the 91 identified contacts were fully followed up, with diagnostic tests revealing no further transmission of the virus.
Within days of the first mpox case being declared, Guinea’s national health authorities published a response plan with technical input from WHO. In Macenta, where the case was discovered, WHO provided training to staff in 18 health centres and two hospitals, to emphasize appropriate infection prevention and control measures that can be used to limit the spread of infection within health facilities. WHO is also continuously supporting laboratories across the country with training and equipment necessary to monitor mpox and a host of other diseases.
The successful containment of mpox has not been limited to Cameroon, Congo, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea and South Africa. With WHO support, in 2024, Angola Mauritius, Morocco, Zambia and Zimbabwe have so far all prevented one or two identified cases from spreading further.
“These countries are evidence of the value, both human and financial, of rapid detection, response and containment. With a timely push of reactive funds and technical assistance from WHO, they were able to stop the virus from spreading on a scale that would ultimately be much more challenging to manage, said Dr Samuel Boland, Mpox Incident Manager at WHO Regional Office for Africa.
Across the African region, 14 countries—the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Uganda, Nigeria, Côte d’Ivoire, Central African Republic, Ghana, Liberia, Rwanda, Kenya, Zimbabwe, Mauritius, Zambia, and Angola—are still assessed to have active transmission of mpox, a viral disease endemic to Central and West Africa. All require further enhancement of disease surveillance measures. High levels of mobility on the continent, the emergence of the particularly infectious clade 1b subvariant in 2023 and the persistent risk of zoonotic transmission are all causes for continued vigilance, even in countries where cases have been successfully contained.
Protecting at-risk populations from mpox in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Brazzaville – The Democratic Republic of the Congo is the hardest hit country in the African region by mpox outbreak, accounting for about 80% of laboratory-confirmed cases and deaths reported across the continent this year. While mpox is primarily transmitted through close physical contact, it can affect anyone. Vulnerable populations are at a heightened risk of infection and severe illness.
World Health Organization (WHO) is working closely with national health authorities to implement targeted interventions to protect vulnerable populations. This includes training health workers, supporting disease surveillance and contact tracing, delivering tailored risk communication and community engagement, providing medical supplies and case management as well as enhancing vaccine delivery systems and infrastructure.
Among the most vulnerable people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are the country’s 7 million internally displaced persons (IDPs), as well as over half a million refugees and asylum seekers, many of whom live in camps with limited access to water, sanitation and health services.
“The detection of mpox cases in these settlements is cause for concern, as high population density can accelerate the spread of the virus. This means we are ramping up public health measures such as increasing access to health services, and sanitation facilities in these areas to prevent mpox transmission,” says Dr Bachir Mbodj, WHO’s mpox Incident Manager in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
As the Democratic Republic of the Congo faces multiple overlapping crises, including conflict and malnutrition, integrating public health measures into broader humanitarian efforts remains a priority. As part of a wider humanitarian response, WHO is working with partners such as Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), Alima, International Organization for Migration (IOM), and UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR) to ensure that essential healthcare services continue within refugee and IDP camps.
“By combining WHO’s technical expertise and IOM’s proficiency in border control, we are able to limit the cross-border spread of mpox and protect communities in both the Democratic Republic of the Congo and neighbouring countries,” said Dr Popol Bureme, IOM’s National Migration Health Officer in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
At least 60 IOM staff have been trained in disease surveillance and mpox case management, with treatment and isolation facilities established at entry points to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same time, and in addition to supporting many dozens more, WHO has deployed 18 doctors to North Kivu to support vaccinations and other medical interventions.
In North Kivu, which is home to 2.5 million IDPs, WHO has established three permanent health centres, capable of treating up to 2000 people per week, near the IDP camps including 23 temporary health facilities and four isolation facilities within the camps. Similar initiatives have also been launched in South Kivu and more than 1800 people have been vaccinated in IDP camps across the country.
WHO is also providing technical and financial support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s National Fight Against HIV/AIDS Programme, leveraging its reach within communities to support sex workers who are also vulnerable to mpox infection. Sex workers make up about 3% of the female population aged between 15 and 49. Support to this group includes screening, providing treatment and follow-up care.
In North and South Kivu, the National HIV/AIDS Control Programme has trained leaders from sex worker associations and other at-risk groups, such as men who have sex with men, to become mpox peer educators. An additional 120 people are set to receive training in the capital, Kinshasa. For every trained peer educator, an estimated 80 people will be reached and receive crucial information on prevention and the benefits of mpox vaccination. To date, around 16% of those vaccinated against mpox in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are sex workers.
“Involving these leaders in our efforts helps raise awareness because they are trusted by the communities they represent and have already proven themselves to be powerful communicators on HIV/AIDS and STIs,” says Dr Clotilde Melisa Inaka Boolu, the programme’s mpox focal point. “The messaging now includes information about mpox, which will protect not just the sex workers, but also their clients and communities.”
WHO, Africa CDC support 17 countries to develop mpox vaccination plans.
Brazzaville – World Health Organization (WHO) and Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC) experts gathered in Brazzaville this week with country representatives and partners to provide guidance for the development of targeted mpox vaccine preparedness and deployment plans to ensure that available doses are used efficiently.
In anticipation of further mpox vaccine deliveries to the African region in the coming months, countries had requested support on identifying and mapping mpox hotspots, areas with high numbers of mpox cases, based on the local epidemiology and the planning of targeted vaccination strategies to reach at risk of mpox populations.
“Given the ongoing difficulties with bringing the outbreak under control using traditional public health measures, the need for effective mpox vaccine preparedness and deployment plans has become urgent. With the mpox vaccine supply constraints, countries will need to develop very targeted deployment plans, guided by local epidemiology,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa.
More than 120 participants from 17 countries along with partners from Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, UNICEF, United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, United States Agency for International Development, and with support from Canada participated in the 5 - 7 November 2024 Regional Mpox Vaccine Preparedness and Deployment Plan Development meeting.
During the meeting, WHO and Africa CDC experts provided countries with the most up to date information on current WHO recommendations and a set of tools to guide mpox vaccination plan development.
Both organizations have made concerted efforts to help countries acquire vaccines amid ongoing outbreaks. WHO added the MVA-BN vaccine to its prequalification list on 13 September 2024; and established an Access and Allocation Mechanism (AAM) to facilitate better access to vaccines, treatments and tests where they are most needed.
Mpox vaccine deployments were delayed on the continent and the supply is likely to remain limited in the near- to medium-term. However, recently 3 countries in the African Region - Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Nigeria received a total of  280 000 doses. Initial vaccination efforts have started in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda and more than 50 000 doses have been administered.
"The swift actions of countries across Africa to roll out targeted mpox vaccination strategies reflect an extraordinary commitment to protect those most vulnerable. Achieving this progress within a short window of time underscores the ambition and resilience of our member states to halt transmission and safeguard at-risk populations. This momentum speaks to the power of collaboration across the continent and with our global partners. Africa CDC remains unwavering in its support, equipping countries with essential tools, guidance, and resources to drive impactful progress in controlling mpox," said Dr Jean Kaseya, Africa CDC, Director General.
WHO and Africa CDC, and other partners are working together in the Continental IMST to support countries to prepare for and respond to mpox outbreaks, not just through vaccination, but also in areas such as diagnostics, case management, risk communication and community engagement.
The collaboration between agencies comes at a critical time, as mpox cases continue to rise on the continent and new cases are reported outside Africa. As of 6 November, more than 11 000 laboratory-confirmed cases had been reported since the start of 2024. Four countries (South Africa, Guinea, Cameroon and Gabon) in October 2024 moved to the ‘controlled phase’ after reporting no new cases for six weeks. Fourteen other countries are currently experiencing active outbreaks in Africa.
The regional meeting focused on support for the following countries: Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Kenya, Nigeria, Republic of the Congo, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
Rwanda begins countdown to declare Marburg outbreak over.
Kigali – Rwanda has discharged the last Marburg virus disease patient, kicking off the mandatory 42-day countdown to declare the end of the outbreak. The country has reported no new confirmed cases since 30 October 2024.
The last patient was discharged on 8 November 2024. Contacts of the last patient, along with those of previously discharged patients, will continue to be followed up until the end of their 21-day observation period. The outbreak can only be declared over if no new infections arise 42 days after the last confirmed case tests negative.
Despite no new cases being reported for over a week, health authorities remain vigilant. During this period of enhanced surveillance, the Ministry of Health will intensify efforts, leveraging the country’s extensive network of almost 60 000 community health workers to conduct active case finding and test any suspected cases, ensuring that no chain of transmission has been missed.
To date, a total of 66 cases and 15 deaths have been recorded during the outbreak, which was declared on 27 September. Health workers, who constitute almost 80% of the cases, primarily became infected while providing emergency care to their colleagues and patients.
Though the outbreak initially spread quickly in the country’s two leading hospitals in Kigali and among the family of one of the first cases, the rapid, robust response resulted in no community transmission to date.
National health authorities, supported by World Health Organization (WHO) and partners, immediately activated the outbreak response to halt further spread and save lives. The deployment of first responders, close monitoring of contacts, and implementation of infection prevention and control measures significantly reduced confirmed case numbers, which were halved between weeks two and three, and decreased by around 90% thereafter.
“This outbreak demonstrates that with the best available treatment, recovery is possible, and contributions to science can be made,” said Dr Sabin Nsanzimana, Rwanda’s Minister of Health. “The evidence generated from this outbreak is going to help shape surveillance activities going forward and prevent future outbreaks.”
Marburg is a highly virulent virus causing haemorrhagic fever, with a fatality ratio of up to 88%. The virus belongs to the same family as the Ebola virus. Illness begins abruptly with high fever, severe headache, and malaise, and many patients develop severe haemorrhagic symptoms within seven days.
The virus is transmitted to people from fruit bats and spreads through direct contact with the bodily fluids of infected people, surfaces, and materials. Supportive care, including rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids and treatment of specific symptoms, improves survival rates.
“Thanks to the concerted efforts of all involved, Rwanda is successfully emerging from a highly challenging outbreak, effectively mitigating its potentially devastating impacts. I commend the Government of Rwanda for the significant progress achieved. WHO remains committed to supporting these ongoing collaborative efforts until the outbreak is officially declared over,” said Dr Brian Chirombo, WHO Representative in Rwanda.
African health ministers, delegates adopt declaration on climate change and health.
Harare – Health ministers and delegates from 20 African countries today adopted a landmark declaration to enhance climate resilience within health systems and address the profound health impacts of climate change on the continent.
The Harare Declaration, endorsed during the first Climate and Health Africa Conference (CHAC), calls for immediate and collaborative action from a wide array of stakeholders—including governments, academic institutions, funding agencies and civil society—to combat the detrimental health effects of climate change and improve the well-being of African populations.
Speaking at the official opening of the conference, President Emmerson Mnangagwa of Zimbabwe said, “Climate change is not merely an environmental disaster. It is a public health emergency and I firmly believe the recommendations from this conference will pave the way for a healthier and more sustainable continent, where no one and no place is left behind”.
The declaration which aligns with the newly WHO adopted framework for building climate-resilient and sustainable health systems in the African region, was endorsed by health ministers and representatives from countries engaged in the WHO-led Alliance for Transformative Action on Climate and Health Initiative (ATACH) and over 500 participants at CHAC.
“Our region deals with multiple climate-induced emergencies every year. Ensuring health systems resilience is key. I applaud the commitments taken by health policy makers to build climate-resilient health systems that can adapt to and mitigate the impacts of climate change,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa.
Africa faces an escalating burden of climate-sensitive diseases, with increasing transmission of vector- and waterborne illnesses. Recent statistics reveal a 14% rise in malaria transmissions in 2023, potentially putting an additional 147-171 million people at risk by 2030. Additionally, 18 African countries reported cholera outbreaks linked to natural disasters, contributing to a staggering 836 600 cases between January 2023 and March 2024, alongside widespread malnutrition and population displacement.
Recognizing the disproportionate burden of climate-related health risks faced by African populations, the declaration presents a comprehensive strategy to address these challenges. It emphasizes the need to strengthen research and knowledge generation by investing in studies that assess the specific impacts of climate change on health in Africa and identify effective interventions. Enhancing policy and decision-making is also crucial by integrating climate change considerations into national health policies and strategies to ensure that health is prioritized in climate action plans.
The declaration also highlights the importance of improving surveillance and early warning systems to track climate-related health risks, enabling timely and effective responses.
Additionally, it calls for building climate-resilient health systems by enhancing the capacity of health infrastructures to adapt to and mitigate the impacts of climate change, including through necessary upgrades and workforce training.
During CHAC, the WHO Regional Office for Africa, in collaboration with the Wellcome Trust, hosted a high-level meeting to promote collaboration among health and climate stakeholders. The meeting was an opportunity to evaluate countries implementation of past Conference of the Parties (COP) commitments and define a roadmap for climate and health in Africa.
With support from WHO, 29 African countries have joined ATACH, signaling dedication to safeguarding the health and well-being of their population.  The WHO-Wellcome Trust side event provided delegates with a platform to discuss actionable strategies for integrating health priorities into global climate frameworks and strengthening inter-ministerial collaboration.
The Climate and Health Africa conference is hosted by the Centre for Sexual Health, HIV and AIDS Research (CeSHHAR) Zimbabwe in collaboration with the Zimbabwean Ministry of Environment, Climate and Wildlife, the Ministry of Health and Child Care and the WHO Regional Office for Africa amongst other partners.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo introduces R21 malaria vaccine.
Mbanza-Ngungu, the Democratic Republic of the Congo – The health authorities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo today introduced the R21 malaria vaccine into the national immunization programme, adding a crucial tool to complement existing malaria control measures to protect and save the lives of young children.
With the country having received 693 500 doses of the World Health Organization (WHO)-recommended R21 vaccines, the first phase of the rollout was kicked off in Kongo Central province targeting 173 375 children in the province’s 31 health zones. WHO and partners including UNICEF, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, the Clinton Health Access Initiative, PATH, Breakthrough Action and SANRU – a national NGO – are supporting the health authorities to ensure effective introduction of the vaccine.
“The introduction of the malaria vaccine is an initiative that highlights the importance of combining high-impact strategic interventions to effectively combat malaria,” emphasized Dr Roger Kamba, Minister of Public Health, Hygiene and Social Welfare.  I would like to express our sincere thanks to all the partners who have provided considerable support for the introduction of the malaria vaccine into our country's immunization schedule,” added Dr. Kamba.
Malaria killed more than 24 000 people and infected over 27 million, mostly children under five years of age, according to the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Social Welfare 2022 report – the most recent data.
“The introduction of the malaria vaccine marks a major milestone in the country’s efforts to safeguard the health and well-being of children,” said Dr Boureima Hama Sambo, WHO Representative in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. “Together with the ongoing malaria prevention measures, and by collectively implementing all the approaches, we can effectively protect families and our communities from this deadly disease.”
Supporting the national health authorities to prepare for the malaria vaccine rollout, WHO has provided technical guidance, health workers have been trained to ensure safe introduction of the vaccine, and public awareness and other communications outreach measures have been established. Administrative, political, religious and community leaders in Kongo Central province have also been sensitized and involved in the preparations to ensure effective ownership of the initiative.
“UNICEF is a key partner in the deployment of the malaria vaccine in the DR Congo. Thanks to our technical expertise, we have helped to build the capacity of health actors, developing appropriate management tools, and implementing effective communication strategies to promote vaccination among parents. UNICEF is committed to continuing its efforts to ensure that all Congolese children benefit from this essential protection, in line with the national vaccine roll-out plan,” said Grant Leaity, UNICEF Representative in the DR Congo.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo becomes the 15th country on the continent that offer malaria vaccination, widening access to more comprehensive malaria prevention. Malaria is a primary cause of illness and death for African children – one child dies from malaria every minute.
“We congratulate the Ministry of Health and its partners on this introduction, particularly at a time when the country faces competing health priorities, including the response to Mpox. This development demonstrates the impact of investing in health systems strengthening to ensure countries' capacity to roll out routine immunisation and respond to health emergencies. Together, Gavi and its partners look forward to continuing to build a stronger foundation for the health and well-being of future generations in the DRC,” said Cyril Nogier, Gavi's Senior Country Director for the DRC.
The country is intensifying malaria control efforts through an ambitious 2024–2028 National Strategic Plan that aims to protect 80% of at-risk populations through a comprehensive approach combining mass distribution of next-generation insecticide-treated nets, expanded preventive treatments for pregnant women and infants, and a pilot implementation of seasonal malaria chemoprevention.
The plan also includes enhanced vector control via indoor residual spraying and larval source management, improved case management with rapid diagnostics and artemisinin-based therapies, strengthened surveillance systems, and robust community engagement. The efforts are supported by multisectoral collaboration between health, environment and education ministries to address this critical public health challenge.
A high impact against malaria can be achieved when the malaria vaccines are introduced with a mix of WHO-recommended malaria interventions that are tailored to the local context. WHO is committed to working with countries and partners to support the rollout of malaria vaccines so more children can benefit from this additional malaria prevention tool as rapidly as possible.
Communications Officer
WHO DRC
WHO in Africa, WomenLift Health sign pivotal agreement to strengthen women’s leadership in health .
Addis Ababa – World Health Organization (WHO) in the African Region and WomenLift Health today crossed a major milestone, cementing a crucial partnership to bolster investments in women’s leadership in health and promote gender equity in the sector across the region.
The two organizations formally signed an agreement to augment the existing women empowerment initiatives at WHO in the African Region that aim to enhance the leadership capacity of mid- to senior-level women leaders as well as to equip them to navigate complex health challenges, foster resilience and strengthen their leadership capacities.
The agreement, signed at the opening of a three-day leadership workshop organized for women health leaders in Addis Ababa from 28 – 30 October 2024, stems from the two organizations’ strong commitment to promote women’s leadership in health.
Under the Transformation Agenda Initiative, Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa, committed to building an empowered and motivated workforce, with a special emphasis on fostering the success and development of women in the Organization.
WomenLift Health is committed to expanding the power and influence of talented women in global health and catalysing systemic change to achieve gender equality in leadership. It envisions a world where diverse, accomplished leaders come together to transform health outcomes globally.
“Promoting women's leadership in health is not only a matter of fairness but also crucial for improving health outcomes in Africa. Women leaders bring invaluable perspectives and experiences to the global health landscape. Through this partnership, we are shaping the future of health in Africa, by empowering women to lead with confidence, vision and purpose,” said Dr Moeti.
The workshop provided targeted training, mentorship, and collaborative sessions for mid- and senior-level women professionals across WHO in the African Region. The participants engaged in a diverse range of activities designed to create a cohort of resilient, empowered women leaders, fully equipped to tackle the complex challenges in global health.
“Investing in women’s leadership in health shapes not only their individual career trajectory, but also the future of global health. By building a resilient pipeline of skilled women leaders, we’re laying the groundwork for transformative, inclusive leadership and I am delighted to see this come alive though our partnership with WHO in the African Region,” said Dr Norah Obudho, WomenLift Health’s East Africa Director.
Under Dr Moeti’s leadership, a series of initiatives have been launched at WHO in the African Region to create an inclusive environment where women leaders can thrive. These include the Africa Women Health Champions initiative; Pathways to Leadership programme for female staff; Women in Leadership Speaker Series; Women in Leadership Masterclass; and the Mwele Malecela mentorship programme for women in neglected tropical diseases.
The collaboration with WomenLift Health augments these ongoing initiatives at WHO in the African Region to strengthen women’s leadership in health. Through the workshop more than 30 women leaders will gain essential skills and insights necessary for effective leadership in the health sector. The partnership will also cultivate critical leadership competencies and provide a platform for women to explore personal leadership perspectives, amplify their voice and lead with purpose.
“Women are the backbone of the healthcare system, accounting for the majority of the healthcare workforce. Our partnership with WHO in the African Region is an important step forward in investing in women to rise to decision-making roles and ensure, with diversity, we have better health outcomes for our communities,” said Akhona Tshangela, Southern Africa Director at WomenLift Health.
Over the past decade, WHO in the African Region has made significant strides in advancing gender equity, achieving a progressive increase in female representation across its workforce. These proactive measures are critical for achieving gender parity in leadership roles and within the broader health sector. However, further dedicated efforts are needed to close the gender equity gap and ensure equal opportunities at all levels. This partnership between WHO in the African Region and WomenLift Health represents a critical step toward advancing these goals.
Chad introduces malaria vaccine in triple-vaccine rollout for children.
N’Djamena – Chad today kicked off an ambitious triple vaccine rollout, including the R21 malaria vaccine, marking a significant step forward in its efforts to safeguard the health and well-being of millions of children.
Along with the World Health Organization (WHO)-recommended R21 malaria vaccine, Chad is simultaneously rolling out PCV13 pneumococcal conjugate and rotavirus vaccines, targeting 19.7 million children aged between six months and five years, among them 168 522 (aged between six and 15 months) will receive the malaria vaccine being introduced in 28 priority districts.
WHO, together with partners including GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance, UNICEF and Gates Foundation, is supporting the triple vaccine rollout in Chad, which has received a total of 157 900 doses of the R21 vaccine.
“This is a very important day for Chad and its children. Malaria vaccines are a breakthrough for child health and malaria control, and the scale up of accessibility in Africa will save tens of thousands of young lives every year,” said Dr Anya Blanche-Philomene Malanga, WHO Representative in Chad.
Today’s launch brings to 14 the number of countries on the continent that offer malaria vaccination, extending access to more comprehensive malaria prevention. Malaria remains endemic in Chad. In 2023 the country recorded about 1.75 million cases of which 36.4% were children under five years of age. A consistent primary health care challenge, malaria cases account for 43% of medical consultations, 36% of hospitalizations and responsible for 30% of hospital deaths, constituting a significant burden to country’s the health system.
In preparation for the rollout, WHO, through the Accelerating Malaria Vaccine Introduction and Roll-out in Africa initiative, has supported rigorous, multi-dimensional preparation activities, including the implementation of targeted training of health care staff, and the creation of a multi-channel communication plan to raise public awareness and mobilize stakeholders.
An inter-agency coordination committee, chaired by Chad’s Minister of Health, Dr Abdelmadjid Abderahim Mahamat, will coordinate and oversee the initiative in line with the National Development Plan.
High-level political will and community demand for malaria vaccines are refocusing attention on the disease, and the notable impact that can be achieved with a strategic combination of interventions for optimal impact.
Pilot introductions of the first RTS,S malaria vaccine into routine immunization programmes in Ghana, Kenya and Malawi from 2019, through the WHO-coordinated Malaria Vaccine Implementation Programme, significantly reduced child deaths, and increased access to malaria prevention.
Senegal becomes first African country to establish emergency medical team following WHO standards .
Dakar – Senegal has become the first country in Africa to receive World Health Organization (WHO) classification for developing the capacity of its emergency medical team to be able to deploy and respond to health crises around the world, marking an historic milestone for the country and significantly boosting the African Region’s emergency response capacity.
The classification of Senegal’s Type 2 Emergency Medical Team (EMT) follows the international EMT standards. The country’s EMT is now deployable within 72 hours to autonomously provide medical and surgical care to up to 2500 patients impacted by health emergencies for a four-week period across the globe, follows a rigorous six-year process. EMT2 Senegal is the 49th classified team globally, with 130 others in process around the world.
“This certification is a real turning point that reflects the dedication of Senegal’s health authorities to ensuring a coordinated and rapid response to emergencies, both nationally and internationally, consolidating our position as a leader in health crisis management in Africa and beyond,” said Dr Ibrahima Sy, Senegal’s Minister of Health and Social Action, at the certification ceremony.
Since 2017, WHO in the African Region has provided intensive technical and financial support to the country, working closely with the Ministry of Health and Social Action, the Health Emergency Operations Centre, and Senegal’s Armed Forces Health Service. During this time, Senegal has already deployed teams to respond to health crises in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Sierra Leone and, most recently, Guinea. The recent establishment of the WHO Regional Emergency Hub has been instrumental in accelerating the finalization of certification process of the Senegal EMT.
“Congratulations to Senegal for this milestone achievement that contributes significantly to the region’s growing expertise in addressing public health emergencies,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti WHO Regional Director for Africa. “Emergency medical teams are a crucial set of health workforce that greatly enhances the capacity of national health systems through rapid action to save lives in times of crises.”
EMTs can provide routine outpatient care, manage emergency and trauma cases, manage mass casualty incidents, outbreaks due to infectious diseases, and safely stabilize and refer patients for higher level care. In addition to clinical expertise, EMT team members are trained to work in the most challenging conditions, establishing field hospitals that are fully self-contained, limiting demands on local resources that may already be stretched in an emergency context.
The main aim of the EMT classification, which is overseen by WHO’s EMT Secretariat, is to improve the quality of care and professionalism of medical teams responding to disasters, conflicts, outbreaks and other emergencies. Populations benefit from the rapid arrival of well-trained EMTs, who support existing medical staff.
The classification is part of the wider vision encompassed in WHO’s Emergency Medical Teams 2030 strategy. This envisions a world in which every country can respond rapidly and effectively to national emergencies, leveraging regional and sub-regional capacities to support vulnerable communities and others in need.
Promising progress on eye health in African region, but challenges remain.
Brazzaville – Despite important progress towards integrating eye health into primary health care services in African countries, a dire shortage of financial resources, combined with the concentration of scarce human resources in urban areas and low community awareness, continues to threaten the gains.
One in every six blind people globally live in Africa, along with 26 million others grappling with some degree of visual impairment. Yet statistics show that despite the onerous burden, only 14% of people who need cataract surgery receive it, while more than 80% of people with shortsightedness receive no treatment. The comparative figure for North America, Australasia, western Europe and the Asia-Pacific region, meanwhile, is lower than 10%.
In addition, only 12% of people in Africa who need glasses or surgical interventions to address blurred vision will receive the necessary care, at significant economic cost to countries. The global estimated costs of uncorrected refractive errors and cataracts is US$14.3 billion annually.
World Health Organization (WHO) in the African Region is recording a decrease in vision loss due to Vitamin A deficiency, onchocerciasis and trachoma, but emerging eye health challenges are rising. These are related to ageing populations, unhealthy lifestyles, and noncommunicable diseases.
“The focus on eye care is critical, given the multiple positive impacts of good vision on all aspects of life, from overall well-being to academic achievements. The contribution to economic growth is also significant, raising the urgency of building on the gains already made, while addressing the emerging challenges,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa, on World Sight Day today.
WHO’s current focus in the region is to support countries to integrate eye health services at primary care level, as part of universal health coverage.  However, with severely limited human resources, the achievement of Integrated People-Centred Eye Care demands innovative interventions, dedicated community engagement, and cross-sectoral coordination of services.
Over the past two years, WHO has provided technical support to six African countries, including Ethiopia, Ghana, Niger, Nigeria, Somalia and Zambia. The work began with the completion of national situational analyses, followed by the development of strategic plans and monitoring frameworks. Operational planning and costing of interventions and resources was also completed, specifically in relation to workforce needs, and the integration of eye care indicators into existing health information systems frameworks.
To support countries towards the achievement of the global target of increasing the number of people with access to appropriate spectacles (known as effective coverage of refractive error or eREC) to 40% by 2030, WHO launched the SPECS 2030 initiative. Still in its initial stages, Liberia and Mozambique have begun implementation.
Meanwhile, WHO also launched a free self-assessment tool designed to support countries to promote healthy habits and raise eye care awareness. Launched last year, the WHOeyes tool, available in multiple languages, is u used to check visual acuity, while also providing educational messaging.
Other support has included the dissemination of strategic documents such as the World report on vision, which outlines WHO’s recommendations for integrated, people-centred eye care, and the launch of the WHO’s Eye Care in Health Systems: Guide for action.
Urgent action needed to accelerate mental health progress in African region.
Brazzaville – The African region has made progress over the past decade to strengthen mental health systems, including investments to improve care, health workforce as well as national policies to steer the delivery of vital services. However, the pace of the progress is slow and further efforts are needed to address mental health challenges and ensure well-being.
Notable advancements in the region include a 14% improvement in the ratio of mental health specialists to population in the six years to 2020, as well as the introduction of mental health care training for primary health care workers in 79% of African region countries as of2020. Government expenditure on mental health in the region has also increased, from US$0.1 to US$0.46 per capita between 2014 and 2020.
In addition, 28% of countries in the World Health Organization (WHO) African Region have integrated mental health and psychosocial support into their preparedness plans for future health crises, while three-quarters have a national mental health policy, and 57% have mental health laws compliant with international human rights instruments – up from 31% in 2014.
Despite the progress, challenges remain in provide adequate health care services and programmes for mental, neurological and substance use. The challenges include poor awareness, stigma around mental health; limited structured financial investment to address mental, neurological and substance use problems; as well as ineffective integration of mental health into primary health care. Others are poor multisectoral collaboration to address psychosocial risks and drivers of mental ill health and weak mental health information systems and limited mental health research in the region.
“Although countries are making positive steps forward to address mental health challenges, urgent action is needed to acceleration action to better protect and promote mental health,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “We’re working closely with countries strengthen action for comprehensive response to mental health and enable transformation towards better mental health for all.”
This year, World Mental Health Day is being marked under the theme “Mental Health at Work” to highlight the vital connection between mental health and work. Social determinants of health such as work-related stress from discrimination, poor renumeration, harassment and bullying, and feeling a lack of control or autonomy can pose a risk to mental health.
Only eight of the 47 countries in the WHO African Region have work-related mental health prevention and promotion programmes in place and only three have active collaboration between government mental health services and ministries or departments of labour/employment.
To improve access to services, WHO is supporting countries to decentralize and integrate mental health at the primary health care level and integrate mental health into other health services such as early childhood development programme, which is currently being rolled out in Kenya, Mozambique and Tanzania. The Organization is also working with governments to adopt rights-based approach to mental health policy, with Ghana and Zimbabwe already implementing the programme. A joint WHO-UNICEF child and adolescent health is also being rolled out in Cote d’Ivoire and Mozambique.
Governments are also taking initiatives to strengthen mental health services. In 2022, African countries endorsed the Regional Framework to Strengthen the Implementation of the Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013 to 2030 in the African Region in which they called for investment in multisectoral coordination, collaboration and partnerships for mental health (including with workers, their representative and employers); aggressive evidenced-based suicide prevention; fighting stigma; adopt policies and legislative reform in line with international human rights standards among other measures to comprehensively address mental health challenges.
Health labour market analysis support tool launched.
Nairobi, Kenya – The World Health Organization, Regional Office for Africa launched the Health Labour Market Analysis (HLMA) Support Tool to assist countries assess their health workforce education capacity, supply, demand and need for health workers and facilitate integrating health workforce planning into Health Labour Marker Analysis.
The World Health Organization (WHO) in 2021 developed the Health Labour Market Analysis Guidebook, trained 75 experts from 25 countries in Africa. Building on this, the WHO designed a HLMA Support Tool which offers a novel workforce planning approach to estimate the needed health workers to address the disease burden of a country or geographical areas based on the essential service packages and the professional standards of care.
Following the launch, the WHO will build the capacity of about 50 international experts on the technical and practical aspects of conducting an epidemiology-based health workforce needs assessment and projections. The training component of the capacity building exercises is scheduled to hold from the 7th to 11th of October 2024 in Nairobi Kenya. This comes at a time when Member States are increasingly adopting this epidemiological approach to assess the need for health workers, to inform health workforce policy, strategy and investment plan development. The experts will contribute to a pool of regional experts that will support the growing number of Member States requesting for technical support.
Whilst launching the Tool and officially opening the training, Dr Abdourahmane Diallo, the WHO Representative in Kenya, emphasised that stimulating adequate and sustainable investment in the health workforce requires comprehensive insights into past and present health workforce dynamics and future projections under different scenarios, and that the HLMA Support Tool, which has already been used by 12 countries, is critical in achieving that outcome.
“The HLMA Support Tool allows users to assess education capacity, health workforce supply, demand and needs, and identify investment requirements for employment. I encourage you to fully engage in this training and build your capacity to support countries in conducting robust health labour market analyses” he stated.
Despite ongoing progress in developing the health workforce in the African region over the past few decades, projections indicate a potential shortfall of 6.1 million health workers by 2030, which is necessary to effectively tackle the Region's disease burden through comprehensive health promotion, disease prevention, treatment, rehabilitation, and palliation.
Also, nearly 27% of the trained health workers remain unemployed, underscoring a mismatch between training outputs and actual job creation. This gap requires a 43% increase in current funding levels dedicated to health workforce employment. A health labour market analysis, already conducted in 22 countries, is critical to stimulating policy reforms and investments to address these challenges.
The experts, after attending the workshop, are expected to apply the tool in support of Member States that request technical assistance related to health labour market analysis and will champion the generation of evidence  needed to inform health workforce investment plans and compacts. These are critical milestones in the implementation of the Africa Health Workforce Investment Charter which was launched  in May 2024.
Burden of hearing loss in Africa could rise to 54 million by 2030: WHO report.
Brazzaville – About 40 million people live with hearing loss in the African region, but the figure could rise to 54 million by 2030 if urgent measures are not take to address the problem, according to a new World Health Organization (WHO) report.
Hearing loss has profound impact on human lives and economies, costing Africa US$ 27 billion annually, according to the Status Report on ear and hearing care in the WHO African Region, launched today during the African Summit on Hearing Impairment in Nairobi, Kenya.
Without urgent interventions, widespread hearing loss, which disproportionately affects poor and vulnerable populations, will continue to escalate, amplifying existing inequalities in health services access across Africa.
For children, the far-reaching consequences of hearing loss include delays in language development, raising the risk of poor educational outcomes and limited future career prospects. Adults with untreated hearing loss often face isolation, loneliness and an increased risk for depression and dementia.
The report identifies multiple factors driving the surge in prevalence of hearing loss in the African region. Primary among these is an acute shortage of ear and hearing care (EHC) specialists, as well as maldistribution of available workforce to the advantage of urban areas. More than 56% of African countries, for example, have only a single ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialist for every million people. In comparison, the  European region has about 50 for every million people.
More than three-quarters of African countries, meanwhile, have fewer than one audiologist and one speech and language therapist for every one million people. In addition, although 33 million Africans could benefit from a hearing aid, only about 10% have access due to lack of EHC financing, and consequent high costs.
Data from 43 African countries show that while 36 countries provide EHC services at the tertiary level, similar services are not offered at primary care level. This is despite the fact that the common causes of hearing loss are mostly preventable through simple public health interventions, or measures to mitigate the risk factors.
Among children living in low- and middle-income countries, the report said, up to 75% of hearing loss is due to preventable causes such as infections and common ear diseases as well as birth complications. Yet, the analysis found that most countries do not routinely conduct hearing screening of newborns.
Even in countries with EHC programmes, EHC interventions are not integrated into such priority health programmes  as school health programme, and occupational health or healthy ageing programme. This challenge, the authors said, was compounded by the lack of national policies and plans for strengthening delivery of EHC, and low implementation levels even where these plans exist. In addition, 35% of countries do not have a budget allocated to EHC activities, with patients having to bear the entire cost of any related treatment and care.
Among other things, the report recommends that countries leverage the report to galvanize action at the highest level, including advocating for policies focused on EHC and related activities. EHC should also be urgently integrated into existing programmes to optimize use of scarce resources. public-private partnerships should be explored by governments towards strengthening EHC services.
The report also highlighted the need for dedicated financing for EHC, to equip facilities and deliver products and technologies, and to optimize EHC research and development and health workforce capacity strengthening.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo kicks off mpox vaccination .
Kinshasa – The Democratic Republic of the Congo today kicked off mpox vaccination, adding a vital measure to complement the ongoing outbreak control efforts to halt the spread of the viral disease and save lives.
The vaccination, launched in the eastern North Kivu province, will prioritize health workers and frontline responders, contacts of confirmed cases, contacts of those contacts, and other at-risk groups. The vaccination will subsequently be rolled out in 11 of the most affected health zones in Equateur, North Kivu, Sankuru, South Kivu, Sud-Ubangi and Tshopo provinces.
The Democratic Republic of Congo has received 265 000 doses of the MVA-BN vaccine donated by the European Commission's Health Emergency Preparedness and Response Authority, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, and the United States Government.
“As we rally efforts to stop the mpox outbreak, the rollout of the vaccine marks an important step in limiting the spread of the virus and ensuring the safety of families and communities,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “Vaccines are an important additional tool in outbreak control and we’re grateful to our partners who have donated the doses. We’re working closely with the national authorities to effectively deliver the vaccines to those who need them most.”
WHO recommends that vaccination be implemented as part of a comprehensive response that includes enhanced surveillance, community engagement, contact tracing, public health and social measures, and appropriate case management. WHO and partners are working closely with the national authorities to scale up and reinforce all the key control measures to save lives and end the outbreak.
To further strengthen the ongoing outbreak response, more than 300 WHO experts supporting polio eradication efforts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have been integrated in the mpox response. The experts have extensive field experience in public health, particularly in community-based and health-facility active surveillance, case investigations, contact tracing and risk communication, and have been at the forefront in the fight against polio and other vaccine-preventable diseases.
In preparations for the mpox vaccination, WHO has supported the national health authorities in a range of areas, including training of health workers; enhancing vaccine delivery systems and infrastructure such as vaccine storage and transportation; community engagement; as well as ensuring supervision and evaluation of the process for quality vaccine delivery. Efforts are also ongoing to reinforce measures to identify and address vaccine mis- and disinformation and engage with community and religious leaders to increase access to accurate information.
Mpox vaccines are currently in short supply, especially in Africa. In September 2024, WHO added the MVA-BN as the first mpox vaccine to its prequalification list, a step that is expected to facilitate timely and increased access to this vital product in communities with urgent need, to reduce transmission and help contain the outbreak.
WHO is working with partners, including Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance and UNICEF, to establish a distribution mechanism for doses being donated by other countries as well as from direct procurements from the vaccine manufacturer.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has reported more than 30 000 suspected and laboratory-confirmed cases, and 990 deaths since the start of 2024 – accounting for 90% of the cases reported from 15 countries in the African region so far this year.
Communications Officer
WHO DRC
Rwanda reports first-ever Marburg virus disease outbreak, with 26 cases confirmed.
Brazzaville/Kigali – Rwandan health authorities are intensifying outbreak control efforts following the detection of Marburg virus disease, with 26 cases confirmed and six deaths reported currently.
Cases of the virus have been reported in seven of the country’s 30 districts. Twenty cases are in isolation and receiving treatment, while 161 people who came into contact with the reported cases have so far been identified and are being monitored as the authorities ramp up comprehensive response measures and deepen investigation to determine the origin of the infection.
In support of the ongoing efforts, World Health Organization (WHO) is mobilizing expertise, outbreak response tools, including emergency medical supplies to help reinforce the control measures being rolled out to curb the virus. A consignment of clinical care and infection prevention and control supplies is being readied and will be delivered to Kigali in the coming days from WHO’s Emergency Response Hub in Nairobi, Kenya.
“We’re rapidly setting all the critical outbreak response aspects in motion to support Rwanda halt the spread of this virus swiftly and effectively,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “With the country’s already robust public health emergency response system, WHO is collaborating closely with the national authorities to provide the needed support to further enhance the ongoing efforts.”
WHO is also coordinating efforts to reinforce collaborative cross-border measures for readiness and response in countries neighbouring Rwanda to ensure timely detection and control of the virus to avert further spread.
Although there are several promising candidate medical countermeasures that are progressing through clinical development, there is no licensed vaccine currently available to effectively combat Marburg virus disease. WHO is coordinating a consortium of experts to promote preclinical and clinical development of vaccines and therapeutics against Marburg virus disease.
Marburg virus disease is highly virulent and causes haemorrhagic fever, with a fatality ratio of up to 88%. It is in the same family as the virus that causes Ebola virus disease. Illness caused by Marburg virus begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache and severe malaise. Many patients develop severe haemorrhagic symptoms within seven days. The virus is transmitted to people from fruit bats and spreads among humans through direct contact with the bodily fluids of infected people, surfaces and materials.
Experts commit to step up immunization programme in Central Africa.
Kinshasa – At their 2024 meeting in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of Congo from 9 to 12 September, Essential Programme on Immunization (EPI) managers from Central African countries committed to consolidate gains made by the EPI in its 50 years of existence.
The meeting, which brought together EPI Managers from Angola, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Sao Tome and Principe was aimed at celebrating the achievements of EPI in the last 50 year of saving lives from vaccine preventable diseases.
The Secretary General of from the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s Ministry of Health, Dr Sylvain Yuma commended stakeholders in EPI for the achievements over the years and highlighted the important role of collaboration among communities, healthcare workers and other actors in the success of the program.
“This celebration is an opportunity to recognize the decisive contribution of health workers at all levels, community health workers, political and community leaders in the implementation of immunization programmes, and in the successes that we are going to celebrate this evening. Without community involvement, it would not have been possible to combat vaccine hesitancy, to vaccinate hard-to-reach populations, and to maintain the provision of immunization services during humanitarian crises and, in conflict zones,” said Dr Sylvain Yuma.
Through EPI, Central African countries have made progress in the fight against vaccine preventable diseases. The sub region has eradicated wild poliovirus and 8 out of 10 countries have achieved maternal and neonatal tetanus elimination.
However, since 2019, the immunization coverage in the Central African sub-region has stalled due to the impact of the COVID19 pandemic and other factors, with over 13 million zero-dose and under-immunized children being recorded from 2019 to 2023. These gaps have left children vulnerable to vaccine preventable diseases, with the sub region recording 9280 cases and 144 deaths from measles outbreaks between January and July 2024.
Therefore, the meeting afforded the directors an opportunity to review status of immunization and discussed ways of strategizing to improve coverage and the gains made by EPI in Central Africa.
“Catching up with the vaccination of millions of children who missed all or part of the vaccines in the national schedule because of the COVID-19 pandemic should be considered as a top priority for EPI in the African region. Successful implementation of the Big Catch-Up Initiative is our only chance of rapidly reducing the immunity gap inherited from the pandemic,” said Dr Matsidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa.
Some of the outcomes of the meeting include the need to address gender and access gaps in immunization programming and promote equitable access to vaccines and leave no one vulnerable to vaccine preventable diseases.
Furthermore, the EPI Managers resolved to strengthen coordination among countries and with partners to facilitate knowledge sharing and unlock funding opportunities to improve immunization service delivery across the sub region.
“Vaccines not only improve public health, but also school performance, household income and economic growth. Every dollar invested in immunization brings a return of US$ 48. It is possible to save more lives through vaccination. UNICEF reiterates its commitment to guarantee the right to immunization and health for every child and every population in West and Central Africa,” said Mr Gilles Fagninou, UNICEF Regional Director for West and Central Africa.
The EPI was launched in 1974 by the World Health Organization, to establish equal access to life-saving vaccination for children across all geographical locations and socioeconomic status. It is estimated that vaccination has accounted for 40% of the observed decline in global infant mortality, and 52% in the African region.  The establishment of Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, in 2000 gave new impetus to EPI by increasing access to sustainable resources to fund immunisation services, strengthening health systems, and supporting the introduction of new vaccines, particularly in low-income countries like most Central African countries.
“This year, we have seen two malaria vaccines being introduced, especially in Africa. I want to recognize the great contribution of African communities and scientists to successful to the process that led to successful rollout of these vaccine. Reaching one billion children with lifesaving vaccines over the next decade is a goal that I am convinced we will achieve,” said Dr Thabani Maphosa, Chief Country Delivery Officer at Gavi.
Joint statement: World Rabies Day.
As we commemorate the eighteenth World Rabies Day on 28 September 2024, the Quadripartite agencies (FAO, UNEP, WHO, and WOAH) and the Global Alliance for Rabies Control (GARC), in the Africa region, are calling on all stakeholders to reflect on the annual theme for 2024, which is, "Breaking Rabies Boundaries."
Rabies continues to take lives and cause suffering among both humans and animals, The disease continues to be a life threat, especially in Africa, where the disease is endemic in almost all countries despite the availability of effective preventive measures.
Hence, this year’s theme reflects the urgent need to transcend the barriers that hinder rabies elimination across the world. As we aim to move beyond the status quo, this year’s theme acknowledges not only the obstacles within our control but also the transboundary nature of rabies itself.
We recognize that achieving our target of Zero by 2030, in line with the ‘Zero by 30 Global Strategic Plan for the elimination of human deaths from dog-mediated rabies’ requires breaking several boundaries, including among others:
Promoting One Health Collaboration: Rabies elimination requires a One Health approach, bringing together human, animal, and environmental health sectors for coordinated, collaborative action. The disease persists due to gaps in collaboration between stakeholders. The Quadripartite Organizations and GARC collectively call for all countries to embrace the One Health approach in rabies control, ensuring that no stakeholder is left behind.
Enhancing Cooperation: Local, national, and international cooperation is vital. This year’s World Rabies Day events will be an opportunity for stakeholders across all levels to deepen their cooperation. This epitomizes the African proverb: “If you want to go fast, go alone. If you want to go far, go together.”
Breaking Siloes: We must align efforts with the Zero by 30 Global Strategy for Elimination of human deaths from dog-mediated rabies, the Quadripartite Joint Plan of Action, the WHO Neglected Tropical Diseases Roadmap, and other relevant frameworks, to build capacity through rabies elimination efforts that help us to tackle multiple other diseases and enhance our overall health systems.
Fostering Innovation: We must adopt novel tools and strategies that will improve rabies prevention and control efforts at local, national, regional, and international levels. The adoption of relevant tools will enable countries to make data-driven decisions and policies in addition to monitoring and measuring the impact of interventions.
Scaling up Vaccination programs: Breaking the boundaries that limit programmatic scale-up will allow us to ensure wider and more effective rabies vaccination campaigns, in both humans and animals. For example, mass dog vaccinations supported by the WOAH vaccine bank in several countries in Africa and FAO's support to strengthen animal systems in nearly all countries in Africa, have demonstrated how community-driven programs can be scaled for broader impact. The gains on mass dog vaccination could be immensely scaled up by coupling with access to human Post Exposure Prophylaxis (PEP), through the GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance, co-financing policy, as part of routine immunization.
Increasing Disease Awareness: Acknowledging the importance of communities as a key stakeholder in rabies elimination, the Quadripartite Organizations and GARC are calling for countries to scale up community engagement and education as a key element of rabies elimination. By fostering community engagement and support, the barriers of lack of knowledge, misinformation, and misconception on rabies prevention will be bridged.
As we look forward to World Rabies Day 2024, we urge individuals, communities, organizations, and governments to take part in activities ranging from mass vaccination campaigns to educational events. By uniting our efforts, we can break these boundaries and achieve a rabies-free world.
Let’s make World Rabies Day 2024 a powerful moment in our journey towards ending this preventable disease once and for all.
Together, we can break rabies boundaries and make history.
Experts agree on African regional plan for health and climate change .
Dakar — More than 80 health and climate change experts, partners and civil society representatives today agreed on a five-year strategic plan for the African region to support countries build resilient and sustainable health system and make health an integral part of negotiations on climate-change adaptation and mitigation.
Meeting in Senegal from 24 to 26 September 2024 for the Fifth Clim-HEALTH Africa meeting. The experts also set in motion discussions and collaborations aimed at driving bold climate actions to address Africa’s climate-induced health challenges. Clim-HEALTH Africa is a consortium for Climate and Health bringing together African technical institutions and international partners to guide and strengthen the public health resilience of African countries and communities to climate change. The network has been working with partners to help predict, prevent, and manage acute public health effects of climate change in Africa through evidence-based climate-informed planning, capacity building and expert knowledge sharing.
African countries are experiencing increasing climate-linked emergencies. In 2023 alone, extreme weather events killed more than 15 000 people, with droughts affecting more than 88 million people across six African countries, according to World Health Organization (WHO) data. However, only 22 countries in the region have national health adaptation plans and less than 20% of the countries have health mentioned in their nationally determined contributions for reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
“Our region is home to six countries of the top ten most disaster affected countries in the world, with heatwaves, floods, cyclones and wildfires affecting health and livelihoods of millions of people,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa.
The finalization of a Clim-HEALTH Africa strategic work plan comes at a time when health is receiving increasing attention in the global discourse on climate change. The plan marks an important step in the continent’s climate change advocacy drive, as it clearly defines how countries can develop national health adaptation plans, integrate climate change and health challenges into national programmes. The plan also ensures the availability of climate and health indicators that will address issues of early warning systems.
With the growing need for countries to have climate-resilient health systems that can adapt to emerging threats, while continuing to meet existing health needs, knowing how to optimize resources remains key. The Clim-HEALTH Africa meeting was an opportunity to strengthen experts’ capacities in climate negotiations in the bid to raise the voice of health in international climate debates.
This meeting organized with support from Wellcome Trust and Spanish Government Agency, builds on Clim-HEALTH Africa’s past four gatherings. In 2017, a roundtable of Clim-Health Africa consortium-initiated discussions around using early warning systems for climate-sensitive diseases. A system which has so far been implemented in three pilot African countries to anticipate and rapidly control some infectious diseases like malaria.
The key shifts highlighted in this year’s meeting include a focus on setting up a coordination mechanism for contributing to global climate and health indicators work programme, building Africa health negotiators’ capacities in climate diplomacy and negotiations and planning for Clim-HEALTH Africa five years activities’ agenda.
“The African regional plan lays a strong foundation for concrete steps that countries can take to address these challenges, assert Africa’s health voice in climate change forums and be resilient in the face of these emerging challenges,” said Dr Moeti.
WHO in Africa, IFRC bolster partnership for enhanced public health emergency response.
Brazzaville/Kinshasa - World Health Organization (WHO) in the African Region and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) have endorsed a regional collaboration framework to strengthen public health emergency response, especially at the community level, and bolster health security.
With the WHO in the African Region’s presence in 47 countries and the IFRC's Africa Regional Office’s support of 49 National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in sub-Saharan Africa as well as over 1.4 million volunteers and 12 000 branches, the two organizations are leveraging their vast networks and presence on the continent to support governments in scaling up response at the community level.
To address the ongoing mpox outbreak, WHO in the African Region and IFRC are reinforcing their long-standing collaboration to support Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ramp up measures for an effective response to halt the outbreak. The collaboration can be expanded to include other countries facing active mpox cases, as well as other public health emergencies.
“As the continent and the world face new and emerging threats, our enduring partnership remains crucial in safeguarding health, enhancing emergency preparedness, and building a healthier, more resilient Africa,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa.
WHO and IFRC have collaborated for decades on the continent, driven by a deep-rooted commitment to save lives. The new collaboration framework will facilitate closer coordination and alignment in the response to health emergencies in Africa. It aims to enhance capacity-building in national health workforces, strengthen disaster preparedness and risk reduction, increase vaccine access and expand evidence-based action. The partnership will also streamline and integrate preparedness approaches within ministries of health and address the health impacts of climate change, among other priority areas for collaborative action across the continent.
Approximately 500 000 IFRC volunteers are in the Democratic Republic of Congo, a country that accounts for 90% of all mpox cases in Africa. They have been trained in community-based surveillance, community engagement, risk communication and case management.
“Our volunteers are members of the community who have built social trust over many years. They generate large reservoirs of applied research and data on the health status of communities,” said Mohammed Omer Mukhier-Abuzein, IFRC Regional Director for Africa.
With an estimated ratio of one volunteer for every 200 people living in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the IFRC workforce will play a crucial role in passing real-time information about suspected outbreaks to WHO’s national mpox response team. This team includes polio experts who have demonstrated considerable effectiveness in previous disease eradication initiatives.
“By combining WHO’s technical expertise and national coordination with IFRC’s grassroots community mobilization, we can create a powerful and complementary response mechanism. This partnership ensures interventions are scientifically sound and locally relevant, setting a new standard for integrated and effective outbreak responses,” said Dr Abdou Salam Gueye, WHO’s Regional Emergency Director for Africa.
Epidemiological surveillance conducted in collaboration with IFRC will support the mpox vaccine rollout in the Democratic Republic of Congo, which is set to begin in the coming weeks. WHO will be able to use data to guide vaccines to where they are needed most.
WHO is supporting countries experiencing mpox outbreaks through multiple response strategies, including enhancing disease surveillance, vaccine introduction readiness, contact tracing, training and combating misinformation.
WHO delivers 33.5 metric tonnes of medical supplies to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Kinshasa – In its largest air cargo shipment to the African region this year, World Health Organization (WHO) today delivered 33.5 metric tonnes of emergency medical supplies and equipment to the Democratic Republic of the Congo to reinforce mpox outbreak response.
Today’s delivery follows an initial shipment of more than 14 metric tonnes of emergency supplies to the country two weeks ago to support infection prevention and control, and clinical care measures in the ongoing outbreak. The two shipments will contribute significantly to infection prevention and treatment services in the country for the next three months.
In addition to reinforcing the mpox outbreak response, the medical equipment and supplies will also be delivered to laboratories as well as district and referral health facilities to provide care for other medical conditions.
“We’re intensifying our support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in all critical areas of the mpox outbreak response, ensuring adequate testing, prevention and effective clinical care to stop the spread of this virus,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “We’re grateful to our partners for the important collaboration in strengthening the ongoing national efforts to bring this outbreak to an end.”
The Democratic Republic of the Congo accounts for about 90% of the more than 31 000 suspected mpox cases reported so far this year from 14 countries in the African region. WHO is working closely with partners and the government to enhance capacity, expertise and outbreak response measures.
The spread of mpox in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is attributed to two distinct main outbreaks: the spread of mpox clade Ia in the western Equateur and other provinces of the country where the disease is endemic, including spread to and outbreaks in the capital Kinshasa; and the spread of clade Ib in North and South Kivu provinces in the east, with a few cases in Kinshasa.
As part of increased support to the mpox outbreak response in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, WHO is expanding its operational capacity in the field, with more than 300 disease surveillance and outbreak response experts from WHO’s polio response programme recently integrated into mpox outbreak control efforts.
In collaboration with national health authorities and partners, WHO experts are also working closely with communities to raise awareness about mpox, promote preventive measures and encourage reporting of cases.
Efforts are also being ramped up to strengthen national diagnostic capacities by providing testing kits, reagents and machines to decentralize testing in eight laboratories. On 19 September 2024, WHO dispatched 3500 GeneXpert cartridges to provincial laboratories to ensure adequate testing for effective clinical care, thanks to support from the United States Agency for International Development.
In readiness for mpox vaccine rollout, WHO is working with countries to ramp up measures to ensure effective introduction of the vaccines. WHO has developed an mpox vaccine roadmap and readiness tool and is supporting countries to develop national vaccine deployment plans that target those populations at highest risk.
Communications Officer
WHO DRC
Three Central African countries commit to global eradication of Guinea-worm disease.
N’Djamena – Ministers of Health of Cameroon, the Central African Republic and Chad have pledged to scale up efforts to eradicate Guinea-worm disease by 2030 in line with the road map to end neglected tropical diseases by the end of the decade.
Meeting on 17 September 2024 at an international high-level meeting to advocate and mobilize resources for the eradication of Guinea-worm disease, the ministers signed the N'Djamena Declaration on interrupting the transmission of Guinea-worm disease or dracunculiasis in the subregion. The N'Djamena meeting was organized by the Government of Chad, in collaboration with World Health Organization (WHO) and The Carter Center.
The meeting highlighted the need to scale up community-based surveillance, while maintaining and increasing domestic funding for national programmes to stop transmission. The discussions also identified the need to strengthen advocacy for access to drinking water and for implementing legal and regulatory measures to control dog and cat populations with a view to halting the spread of Guinea-worm disease and rabies within communities. The final point focused on strengthening synchronized cross-border interventions in endemic districts.
“The holding of this international meeting in N’Djamena takes on special significance, as only five countries in the world are currently endemic to this disease, including our own," said H.E Allah-Maye Halina Mahamat, the Prime Minister of Chad. “As a signatory to the Abu Dhabi Declaration in March 2022 in the United Arab Emirates, Chad is committed to strengthening its leadership with a view to improving the health and well-being of its people. That commitment has been given tangible expression. In line with its steadfast commitment, Chad will continue to strengthen its strategies and actions to combat Guinea-worm disease.”
Chad accounts for over 50% of human cases of infection with Guinea-worm disease, and over 80% of animal infections recorded worldwide each year. The global incidence of the disease has dropped steeply, from around 3.5 million cases in the 1980s to just 14 in 2023, including nine in Chad. The human cases reported by Cameroon and the Central African Republic in 2019 and 2022 respectively are strongly suspected of having been imported from Chad, given the population movements on both sides of the border.
“Just as the people of Chad no longer face the threat of African trypanosomiasis, so today we stand on the threshold of freeing Chad – and the world – from Guinea-worm disease,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “This achievement is not just about numbers; it is about lives transformed and communities empowered.”
Significant progress has been made to eradicate Guinea worm in the African region with over 99 % reduction in cases from 843 640 when the eradication campaign was launched in 1989, to just 14 cases in 2023. Forty-two countries have been certified as having eradicated the disease; five remain to be certified (Angola, Chad, Ethiopia, Mali and South Sudan). The last mile to eradication faces huge challenges such as animal transmission creating spill-over infections to humans, inadequate safe water supply, dwindling funding, insecurity, cross border population movements, and climate change impacting water river basins.
“I encourage Governments to prioritize Guinea-worm disease surveillance across borders, integrate its eradication interventions into other disease control interventions and expand financing network through domestic resource mobilization,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa, congratulating Chad on its progress towards the elimination of neglected tropical diseases, notably the elimination of human African trypanosomiasis as a public health problem by 2024.
WHO recommends maintaining active dracunculiasis surveillance for at least 3 consecutive years in countries and/or areas that have recently interrupted transmission. Such surveillance is essential to ensure that no human or animal cases of the disease go undetected, and to prevent any recurrence.
The Organization advocates for eradication, provides technical guidance, coordinates eradication activities, ensures the implementation of surveillance in dracunculiasis-free areas, monitors the situation and tracks progress.
Sahel, Lake Chad Basin countries coordinate joint polio eradication plan.
Brazzaville/Dakar — In a significant move to combat the ongoing challenge of variant poliovirus transmission in Central and West Africa, Ministers of Health from the Lake Chad Basin countries and Sahel sub-region have published this week a comprehensive cross-border coordination plan for 2024/2025. This critical initiative aims to bolster joint efforts to eradicate polio and prevent its spread across national borders, ensuring a safer and healthier future for millions of children.
The Lake Chad Basin and Sahel regions present unique challenges in the fight against polio, as they remain critical engines of transmission in Africa. Despite significant efforts, variant poliovirus type 2 continues to spread across these areas, driven by factors such as insecurity, inadequate healthcare access, and high population mobility. This cross-border coordination plan aims to strengthen collaboration among the seven key countries—Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Mali, Niger and Nigeria—to interrupt transmission by the end of 2025.
The African Region, declared free of indigenous wild poliovirus in August 2020, now faces a new and urgent threat: the intense transmission of type 2 variant poliovirus. The initiative is part of a broader Africa Regional Polio Eradication Action Plan that sets a bold and comprehensive approach to end all forms of poliovirus transmission in Africa.
The plan emphasizes a more aggressive outbreak response strategy, treating all polio cases, including those linked to circulating variant polioviruses, with the same urgency as wild poliovirus. With the implementation of expanded, high-quality immunization campaigns, the plan aims to interrupt all ongoing polio transmission by December 2025.
Central to this strategy will be the new ¨Lake Chad Basin Task Team¨, a coordination office based in N'djamena to centralize the polio response. This will help health authorities, technical teams, and countries to better coordinate by sharing information in real time for informed public health decisions.
“This situation demands a unified, inter-country response akin to the successful efforts that eliminated the wild poliovirus, therefore we are working on a robust incident management system to ensure synchronized vaccinations and cross-border coordination” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Director for Africa.
High-level political commitment is central to the success of this initiative. During the virtual interministerial meeting on 16 August 2024 and during a Side Event attended by Member States from the African region, senior government leaders and Global Polio Eradication Initiative partners expressed commitment to interrupt variant poliovirus transmission.
In 2024 alone, 134 polio detections (both in the environment and in affected people, as of September 5th) have been reported jointly in Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Mali, Niger and Nigeria. In response, nearly 70 million children have been vaccinated across these critical areas since the beginning of the year.
Recognizing the critical need for renewed collaboration, government leaders, along with WHO, UNICEF and other partners came together in July and August 2024 and crafted a new plan focused on eradicating the variant poliovirus across seven key countries.
These discussions culminated in the endorsement of the new plan, which outlines ten key commitments to eradicate the variant poliovirus across the seven countries.
“We commend the governments for their leadership in implementing high-quality synchronized polio campaigns involving all key stakeholders, especially communities and traditional leaders. Together, we can make a difference”, said Gilles Fagninou, UNICEF Regional Director for West and Central Africa.
The plan starts by emphasizing the critical importance of making the interruption of transmission a top health priority. This goal is to be achieved by advocating for sustained political commitment at the highest levels of government and establishing dedicated Incident Management Systems in each country. To ensure effective collaboration across the region, the plan supports the establishment of multi-country coordination mechanisms. These mechanisms will oversee cross-border activities, facilitating seamless cooperation among nations.
Central to the strategy is the development and implementation of national plans that prioritize cross-border coordination. A key element of these plans is also the synchronization of polio vaccination campaigns across borders, which will enable the coverage of all at-risk populations, particularly those living in border regions. To bolster these efforts, the plan aims to enhance cross-border activities that focus on reporting, detection, information-sharing, and response coordination. Special attention will be given to mobile populations and hard-to-reach areas, ensuring no one is left behind.
Strengthening routine immunization efforts is also a priority, with a particular focus on reaching unvaccinated and under-vaccinated children. Joint community engagement activities across borders will be conducted to foster cooperation and ensure communities are well-informed and involved in the eradication efforts.
Regular vaccination and disease surveillance data sharing among all partners and neighbouring countries will be enabled using specialized tools, such as Geographic Information System technology. This will facilitate timely and accurate decision-making. Lastly, a robust monitoring and accountability framework will be established, with regular ministerial dialogues to evaluate progress and address challenges, ensuring the sustained momentum needed to achieve the goal of eradicating variant poliovirus in the region.
With the goal of ending active poliovirus outbreaks in the Region by the end of 2025, this collective effort is vital to achieving a polio-free Africa by the end of 2026. The endorsement of this plan marks a renewed commitment to safeguard current and future generations from the life-long effects of polio.
African CDC and WHO launch joint continental plan to scale up mpox outbreak response.
Kinshasa – In a significant step to strengthen and accelerate the response to the ongoing the mpox outbreak, the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC) and World Health Organization (WHO) today launched a joint continental response plan for Africa to support countries’ efforts to curb the spread of the virus, save and protect lives.
The launch of the Mpox Strategic Preparedness and Response Plan follows the declarations of a public health emergency of continental security (PHECS) on 13 August 2024 by Africa CDC, and a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC) on 14 August 2024 by WHO.
“We are proud to jointly launch this plan which unites all stakeholders in a coordinated approach to tackling the mpox outbreaks across Africa,” said Dr Jean Kaseya, Africa CDC Director General. “This unified strategy ensures that all partners are aligned on common objectives, eliminating duplication and maximizing impact.”
The overall estimated budget for the six-month plan, running from September 2024 to February 2025, is close to US$ 600 million with 55% allocated to mpox response in 14 affected Member States and readiness in 15 other Member States, while 45% is directed towards operational and technical support through partners.
“This is an important milestone for a coordinated action between our agencies to support countries by reinforcing expertise, mobilizing resources and capacities to swiftly and effectively halt the spread of mpox,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa “By coming together we can achieve more, and our collective strength will carry us further, ensuring that communities and individuals are protected from the threat of this virus.”
Over the past three years, mpox cases have increased at an unprecedented rate in Africa. In addition to zoonosis-linked outbreaks, the intensified human-to-human transmission through sexual behaviours and other factors, requires urgent attention and an enhanced response.
To address the ongoing mpox outbreaks, a comprehensive strategy is critical for effective management and mitigation. The Mpox Strategic Preparedness and Response Plan emphasizes a community-centred, multisectoral approach tailored to the unique epidemiology and risk profiles of each Member state. The plan bolsters surveillance, laboratory testing, community engagement, and ensures the availability of critical countermeasures, while building resilient and equitable health systems.
Under the plan, Member States are classified into four categories based on their Mpox status and risk level:
Priority actions are outlined for each category to guide national strategies in responding to the mpox epidemic.
The plan includes measures to strengthen surveillance, laboratory detection, case management, infection prevention and control (IPC), vaccination, risk communication and community engagement (RCCE) and research and innovation.
This continental response, co-coordinated by Africa CDC and WHO, is supported by workstreams led by key partners, leveraging their comparative advantages. WHO and Africa CDC will collaborate with stakeholders, including UN agencies, non-governmental organizations, and civil society, which will participate in relevant pillars of the response. In line with the Lusaka Agenda, the Mpox response will follow the “one team, one plan, one budget, one M&E” approach. To that end, a continental Incident Management Team has been established, comprising members from key partners.
NOTE TO EDITORS
About Africa CDC
The Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC) is a continental autonomous public health agency of the African Union that supports member states in efforts to strengthen health systems and improve surveillance, emergency response, and prevention and control of diseases.
Learn more at: http://www.africacdc.org and connect with us on LinkedIn, Twitter, Facebook and YouTube
About World Health Organization
The World Health Organization contributes to a better future for people everywhere. Good health lays the foundation for vibrant and productive communities, stronger economies, safer nations and a better world. As the lead health authority within the United Nations system, our work touches people’s lives around the world every day. In Africa, WHO serves 47 Member States and works with development partners to improve the health and well-being of all people living here. The WHO Regional Office for Africa is located in Brazzaville, Congo. Learn more at www.afro.who.int and follow us on Twitter, Facebook and YouTube.
African health ministers, partners urge equitable access to critical tools to curb cervical cancer threat.
Brazzaville – Inequitable access to vaccines and high-performance screening tools is hampering efforts to effectively reduce the growing burden of cervical cancer in the African region, which accounts for the highest rates of new cases and deaths due to the disease.
Despite being preventable and treatable through human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination and screening, and curable when detected early, cervical cancer remains the most common cause of cancer-related deaths in the African region. Of the more than 76 000 cervical cancer deaths globally in 2022, the most updated data available, nearly a quarter (23%) were in Africa.
At a special event during the Seventy-fourth session of the World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Committee for Africa, being hosted by the Republic of the Congo in Brazzaville this week, African health ministers and partners highlighted the urgent need for equitable access to affordable HPV vaccines and HPV DNA testing, to accelerate progress towards elimination.
To date, only 28 countries in the African region have introduced HPV vaccines into routine immunization programmes, with just four of these achieving 90% vaccination coverage in 2023. For screening, surveys reveal very low coverage of about 11%. Only 17 countries have introduced HPV-based screening, albeit not nationally, highlighting the importance of an integrated person-centred approach.
“Cervical cancer services need to be integrated throughout the life course to leverage the opportunities of other programs within the health system”. I urge all to collectively work together in awareness creation for the fight against cervical cancer”, noted, Mr Gilbert Mokoki, Minister of Health of Congo, speaking on behalf of the First lady of Congo, H.E Antoinette Sassou N’Guesso.
According to modelling by HPV-ADVISE, involving 40 countries in sub-Saharan Africa, current vaccination coverage and screening uptake rates are inadequate to enable elimination of cervical cancer by 2100. However, if countries achieve and maintain the WHO-recommended 90% vaccination coverage for girls, and 70% screening uptake targets, the modelling shows that 24 million cervical cancers would be averted by the turn of the century.
“The burden of cervical cancer in Africa is a stark illustration of the impacts of global inequities, which exacerbate barriers including scarce resources, lack of prioritization by funders, and ultimately, limited capacity to manage the threat. Affordable and accessible HPV tests and vaccines are critical if we are to accelerate elimination of cervical cancer as a public health problem in the region, and narrow the wide gap in health inequality globally,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO’s Regional Director for Africa.
The special event at the Regional Committee aimed to spark high-level political advocacy and partner buy-in, specifically the initiation of a joint regional mechanism to increase access to HPV vaccines and HPV-based tests, so boosting cervical cancer screening and prevention coverage.
A critical element for success, WHO stressed is the delivery of cervical cancer services within a people-centred, primary health care approach, to ensure accessibility and sustainability. In Cameroon, Malawi, Uganda and Zimbabwe, for example, cervical cancer screening has been integrated into HIV and sexual and reproductive health services.
The proven cost-effectiveness of these interventions supports the argument for broader implementation, with all eligible women who visit health facilities, at any level, being offered comprehensive cervical cancer services.
“As partners, we need to take advantage of the overlap between cervical cancer and other services for women, such as HIV programs and reproductive health services, to ensure integration at policy, financing, programme and service level,” said Dr Phillipe Duneton, Executive Director of Unitaid.
Fourteen African countries, key partners unite to provide critical resources for health in WHO’s first-ever Investment Round  .
Brazzaville — In an unprecedented show of unity in support of the World Health Organization, 14 African countries and many partners pledged over US$ 45 million to the WHO Investment Round, a three-month-old initiative aimed at generating sustainable financing for the organization at the centre of the global health architecture.
The commitments were made during the World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Committee for Africa, with Member States underscoring the importance of investing in global health and ensuring a strong WHO.
“I thank our African Region Member States for actively supporting WHO’s first Investment Round to mobilize predictable and flexible resources needed for our core work over the next four years,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “Full, sustainable funding will enable WHO to support countries better in their work to build healthier, more resilient, and more prosperous populations.”
The countries and partners came together for the historic event aimed at sustainably funding WHO and thus enabling it to more effectively fulfil its mandate and advance key objectives to promote, provide and protect health and well-being for all. The countries included Botswana, Cabo Verde, Chad, Congo, Ethiopia, Mauritius, Namibia, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, Seychelles, South Africa, Tanzania and The Gambia.
Many partners joined Members States in making commitments of support to WHO and committing to providing pledges later in the year, including Helmsley Charitable Trust, World Diabetes Foundation, Roche, Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, African Development Bank and the WHO Foundation.
“A strong, predictable and sustainably financed WHO is essential for our region and the world to meet the multiple health threats we face; and support the prevention of disease based on the vast evidence at our disposal,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “Every pledge and every partnership counts. Together, we can achieve a future where health and well-being are accessible to all.”
The WHO Investment Round will continue in the coming months and feature key pledging moments around the world. Information can be found here:  https://www.who.int/about/funding/invest-in-who/investment-round
With a fully and sustainably funded operating budget over the next four years, WHO will be better able to tackle emergencies and outbreaks that threaten lives and jeopardize global health security; reduce the burden of both infectious and noncommunicable diseases; and continue working to improve the health and well-being of everyone, especially the most vulnerable.
Dr Faustine Engelbert Ndugulile of Tanzania nominated as next director for WHO African Region.
Brazzaville – Dr Faustine Engelbert Ndugulile has been nominated as the next Regional Director for the World Health Organization (WHO) African Region, taking the reins from Dr Matshidiso Moeti, who has served two five-year terms at the helm.
African Member States voted to nominate Dr Ndugulile during the Seventy-fourth session of the WHO Regional Committee for Africa, held in Brazzaville, Republic of the Congo. Other candidates were Dr Boureima Hama Sambo (proposed by Niger,) Dr Ibrahima Socé Fall (proposed by Senegal) and Dr Richard Mihigo (proposed by Rwanda).
Dr Ndugulile’s nomination will be submitted for appointment by the 156th session of the WHO Executive Board, which takes place in February 2025 in Geneva, Switzerland. The newly appointed Regional Director will take office thereafter for a five-year term and be eligible for reappointment once.
In his acceptance remarks, Dr Ndugulile expressed commitment to advancing health of the people of the region. “I’m truly honoured and humbled to be elected to the position of WHO Regional Director for Africa. I thank Member States for the trust shown in me. I promise to work with you and I believe that together we can build a healthier Africa,” said Dr Ndugulile.
Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General, congratulated Dr Ndugulile on his election as Regional Director for Africa, and praised Dr Sambo, Dr Fall and Dr Mihigo on their campaigns.
“Dr Ndugulile has earned the confidence and trust of the Member States of the region to be elected the next Regional Director for WHO Africa. This is a great privilege, and a very great responsibility,” said Dr Tedros. “I and the entire WHO family in Africa and around the world will support you every step of the way.”
Dr Tedros also thanked Dr Moeti, the outgoing WHO Regional Director, for 10 years of commitment and excellence in service of the countries and people of Africa.
“I thank my sister Dr Moeti for everything she has done for the health of the people of Africa, but also for who she is,” said Dr Tedros. “I thank her for the example she has set, and the legacy she has left.”
Dr Moeti congratulated Dr Ndugulile and wished him success. “I would like to congratulate you for being elected as the Regional Director for Africa. This is an extremely fulfilling role. Despite the many challenges, I know you will take the baton and go on to accelerate the gains already made, putting the health and well-being of the people of Africa at the centre,” said Dr Moeti.
First-ever delivery of mpox vaccines in Africa outside of clinical trials arrives in Nigeria.
Abuja/Brazzaville – Nigeria today received 10 000 doses of mpox vaccines, becoming the first country in the African region to receive doses to respond to the outbreak of the viral disease that has affected several countries and led to the declaration of a public health emergency of international concern by World Health Organization (WHO).
The vaccine, Jynneos (MVA), manufactured by Bavarian Nordic pharmaceutical firm, were donated by the United States government. The vaccines are set to be rolled out in five states with the highest burden of mpox cases. They will be administered in a two-dose schedule to 5 000 people most at risk of mpox, including close contacts of mpox cases and frontline healthcare workers, with a provision for reactive vaccination in other states as the need arises.
“We are pleased to receive this modest initial donation of the mpox vaccine which is safe and efficacious. We will continue to strengthen surveillance and be vigilant to prevent and control mpox. We urge the global health community to expand access to vaccines,” said Hon Muhammad Ali Pate, Nigeria’s Minister of Health.
In preparation for vaccine administration, Nigeria’s National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and Control has granted Emergency Use Authorization for the mpox vaccine. The health authorities have also taken measures to preposition the vaccines to reach priority populations.
“The delivery of the mpox vaccines to Nigeria not only constitutes a crucial addition to the ongoing measures to halt the virus and protect health, it’s also a clear demonstration of international solidarity in the face of global public health emergencies,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director of Africa. “We are grateful for the generosity of the United States government and look forward to increased global support to effectively address the threat of mpox.”
There are currently serious gaps in mpox vaccine access, especially in Africa. WHO is working with countries and manufacturers to ramp up access to vaccines. WHO Director-General has triggered the process for Emergency Use Listing of vaccines to accelerate vaccine access, particularly for lower-income countries.
WHO is also working with partners like Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, and UNICEF to enable donations from countries with existing stockpiles. The partners are building a donation scheme so that the limited vaccines are used where they have the greatest public health impact.
Nigeria is scaling up key aspects of outbreak response areas. WHO is supporting the government to strengthen surveillance and contact tracing, laboratory capacity, risk communication and community engagement. The health authorities are also carrying out early case detection and diagnostics, and enhancing cross-border surveillance, including at major points of entry across the country.
The country has reported mpox cases for several years, with a peak in 2022. As of 10 August 2024, there were 786 suspected cases, 39 confirmed cases, with no deaths so far this year.
So far this year, 12 countries in the African region are reporting cases. In total more than 15 000 suspected cases have been reported since the beginning of this year. Out of these, over 3500 cases are laboratory-confirmed, including 26 deaths. WHO is working with national authorities and partners to strengthen response measures in the affected countries and step up preparedness in countries yet to report cases.
African health ministers kick off region’s top health forum.
Brazzaville – African health ministers and government representatives gathering in Brazzaville, Republic of Congo, today kicked off the Seventy-fourth session of the World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Committee for Africa, the continent’s flagship health forum held annually to discuss and agree on measures to address health challenges and promote people’s well-being.
The meeting, which takes place from 26–30 August 2024 in Congo’s capital city, brings together health ministers from the 47 countries of the WHO African Region to discuss and approve regional policies, and adopt key resolutions to guide the Organization’s work on the continent. During this year’s meeting, the ministers will also nominate a new Regional Director to succeed Dr Matshidiso Moeti, who is ending her 10-year tenure at the helm.
“The Republic of the Congo is honoured to host this important session of the World Health Organization's Regional Committee for Africa,” said H. E President Denis Sassou N’Guesso at the opening of the Regional Committee, pointing out that “health is our greatest asset ... WHO's commitment to this noble cause to ensure people’s survival is a great encouragement …”
“This meeting is being held at a decisive moment for Africa. The continent is facing unprecedented challenges that require immediate and concerted action on our part,” said Ambassador Minata Samaté Cessouma, African Union Commissioner for Health, Humanitarian Affairs and Social Development.
Key agenda items include a focus on mitigating high rates of child mortality and the need to urgently turn the tide on this significant threat to Africa’s children. Polio and cervical cancer are two other health challenges that will receive special attention. For polio, the aim is to reinforce commitments and strategize to achieve complete eradication; for cervical cancer, a special side event will highlight the need to prioritize prevention through human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination and screening.
WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus praised Member States for strengthening emergency preparedness and primary health care, negotiating a pandemic agreement and supporting the Investment Round to increase sustainable financing for WHO.
But the new mpox outbreaks showed why sustained commitment and investment was needed to protect and promote public health in Africa, Dr Tedros added.
“WHO is committed to working with African countries and partners to bring the mpox outbreaks under control quickly, and I am confident we can,” Dr Tedros said. “But the emergency highlights the weaknesses in the health security architecture, in Africa and globally. This is why all Member States should actively engage in negotiations on the Pandemic Agreement and invest in WHO and public health, to protect people today and tomorrow.”
This week’s events will also provide a platform to recognize the significant progress made in the WHO African region, specifically the celebrated Transformation Agenda, driven by Dr Moeti during her mandate as Regional Director. The region has also been declared free of wild poliovirus, marking a historic public health victory, while 19 African countries have successfully eliminated at least one neglected tropical disease.
“Never before have governments and partners been so determined to make a better impact - through supporting integrated approaches to addressing health problems; focusing on people; and reducing the fragmentation that has limited the outcomes of significant health investments,” said Dr Moeti.
About 800 participants are attending the event, including representatives from United Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations, civil society, academia and development partners, either in-person or virtually.
Scaling up response to curb growing mpox outbreak in African region.
Brazzaville – As the mpox outbreak that has affected the Democratic Republic of the Congo and spread to neighbouring countries continues to grow, World Health Organization (WHO) is intensifying support to countries to scale up measures to curb the virus and save lives.
On the advice of independent experts of the International Health Regulations Emergency Committee, WHO Director-General has determined that the upsurge of mpox constitutes a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC). The emergence of a new strain of the mpox virus in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its rapid spread, including to neighbouring countries, is one of the main reasons for the declaration of the PHEIC, the second such determination in two years relating to the disease.
So far this year, more than 2100 laboratory-confirmed cases and 13 deaths have been reported from 12 countries (Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Liberia, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa and Uganda) compared with 1145 confirmed cases and seven deaths in the whole of 2023 reported from 11 countries.
“We are hard at work on the frontlines of the response, collaborating closely with governments and communities to strengthen mpox control measures and are ramping up efforts to curb the widening trend of the virus through coordinated action with partners and national authorities,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa.
WHO is stepping up support to the affected countries by deploying additional experts, including epidemiologists and anthropologists, and providing initial funding to accelerate outbreak response measures. Efforts are underway to enhance cross-border collaboration for case investigation, contact tracing and community engagement to ensure compliance with preventive measures.
The Organization is also supporting national regulatory authorities to speed up regulatory approvals, as well as providing guidance to national immunization technical advisory groups to ensure readiness for vaccine rollout.  WHO has triggered the process for Emergency Use Listing for mpox vaccines, which will accelerate vaccine access for lower-income countries which have not yet issued their own national regulatory approval. Emergency Use Listing enables partners including Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, and UNICEF to procure vaccines for distribution.
Efforts are also being ramped up to strengthen national diagnostic capacities by providing testing kits, reagents and machines to decentralize testing. Genomic sequencing is also ongoing to determine the mpox clades.
To enhance preparedness in countries neighbouring the Democratic Republic of the Congo and those at risk, disease surveillance and training of frontline health workers are being stepped up as well as public awareness campaigns.
Caused by an Orthopoxvirus, mpox was first detected in humans in 1970, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The disease is considered endemic to countries in central and west Africa. Mpox is transmitted from animals to humans. It can also spread from humans to humans through contact with bodily fluids, lesions on the skin or on internal mucosal surfaces, such as in the mouth or throat, respiratory droplets and contaminated objects.
African region faces an unprecedent surge in mpox cases.
Brazzaville – The African region is experiencing an unprecedented increase in mpox cases since the start of 2024, with more countries previously unaffected by the disease reporting cases in an expanding spread of the virus.
World Health Organization (WHO) has elevated the mpox outbreak response to the highest-level requiring organization-wide mobilization and scale-up. In addition, WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus has called for an emergency committee of experts meeting to determine whether the outbreak constitutes a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.
Fifteen African countries are currently reporting mpox outbreak, with a total of 2030 confirmed cases and 13 deaths so far this year compared with 1145 cases and seven deaths in the whole of 2023. Four countries – Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda – previously unaffected by mpox have reported cases since mid-July 2024.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which accounts for more than 90% of the reported cases, a new variant that emerged in September 2023 is circulating in its eastern region. Neighbouring Rwanda and Uganda have reported cases of the new variant. Kenya has also confirmed cases of the new variant. Analysis are ongoing in Burundi to determine whether the reported cases are due to the new variant.
“The priority is to rapidly interrupt the transmission of the virus. We’re collaborating with partners in support of countries to reinforce outbreak control measures and ensure that communities are central to ongoing efforts to effectively end these outbreaks,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa.
The pattern of transmission varies across the region, with the spread of new variant (known as clade 1b) in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo linked to transmission through sexual contact and high population movement, while in South Africa most of the cases are among people identifying as men having sex with men. Transmission in West and Central Africa is associated with the 2022 global outbreak. However, further analysis is required to better understand the patterns of transmission to refine the response to the outbreak.
WHO is working at the global, regional and national levels as well as with partners, including the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention and others to ensure effective response to the outbreak.
In the African region, WHO is working through country teams and experts deployed on the ground to support national authorities strengthen key response areas, including disease surveillance, diagnosis testing and clinical care, infection prevention and control. WHO is working with the health authorities to access therapeutics, decentralize laboratory services for enhanced diagnostic capacities, and ramp up efforts to raise awareness about the risk of the disease among communities.
Field investigation and active case finding are also being reinforced in the affected and at-risk countries. The Organization is coordinating closely to enhance contact tracing, leveraging experience from prior outbreaks to ensure interventions best support and elevate the needs of key populations. WHO is also mobilizing financial support to help countries effectively respond to the outbreak.
WHO is advancing the process for Emergency Use Listing Procedure, an approach to assess and list unlicensed vaccines, therapeutics and diagnostics to expediting their availability for use during public health emergencies. The Organization is already working closely with countries to develop their vaccination strategies and plans, to roll out the vaccines as soon as they are available. Vaccines are one among many public health tools that are used to control mpox.
Mpox is transmitted from animals to humans, with cases often found close to tropical rainforests where there are animals that carry the virus. The disease can also spread from humans to humans through contact with bodily fluids, lesions on the skin or on internal mucosal surfaces, such as in the mouth or throat, respiratory droplets and contaminated objects.
Treatment of mpox patients is supportive dependent on the symptoms. Various therapeutics that may be effective against mpox are being developed and tested.  Prevention and control of rely on raising awareness in communities and educating health workers to prevent infection and stop transmission.
Mozambique introduces R21 vaccine, bolstering malaria control efforts .
Maputo – Mozambique today reached an important milestone in malaria prevention among children with the introduction of the R21 vaccine, which will help reduce malaria cases and save thousands of children’s lives each year. In Africa, one child dies from malaria every minute.
Through Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, and co-financing from the Government of Mozambique, the country has received about 800 000 malaria vaccine doses to vaccinate around 300 000 children through the country’s Expanded Programme on Immunization. The vaccine will be distributed in 22 districts in Zambézia province. It will be administered in a 4-dose schedule, with the first dose covering children aged 6 to 11 months.
“The malaria vaccine, which is being rolled out initially in Zambezia today, is one of the latest approaches in the fight against the disease,” said Hon Dr Armindo Tiago, Minister of Health. “The choice of Zambezia as the launch site is due to the high burden of the disease in the province. The vaccine will be administered in four doses with the aim of reducing the severe malaria illness and death.”
The WHO-recommended R21 vaccine is safe and effective. When provided in childhood immunization (programme?), it reduces over half of malaria cases (as high as 66%) in children during the first year of follow-up and prolonged protection with the fourth dose of vaccine. This vaccine represents an advancement for child health, disease control and reduction of child mortality. In Mozambique, malaria endemic, with a prevalence of 32% in under 5 children.
“The introduction of the malaria vaccine into Mozambique's childhood vaccination programme is a historic event because it is the result of research and trials carried out by Mozambican scientists in Mozambique that led to the development of the first vaccine of its kind, the RTS,S vaccine. This pioneering work laid the foundations for WHO to recommend the RTS,S and R21 vaccines for childhood immunization from 2021,” Dr Severin von Xylander, WHO Representative in Mozambique
The introduction of the malaria vaccine in Mozambique brings to 11 the number of countries on the African continent to offer malaria vaccines, with eight countries providing  RTS,S and three offering R21 as part of childhood immunization programme. The wider malaria vaccine rollout is expanding access to more comprehensive prevention against the disease.
Malaria continues to be a huge health challenge in the African region, which is home to 11 countries that bear approximately 70% of the global malaria burden. The region accounted for 94% of global malaria cases and 95% of all malaria deaths in 2022, according to the 2023 World Malaria Report.
In additional to the vaccine, efforts must continue to increase the coverage and use of insecticide-treated nets. Only 57% of households in Mozambique have at least one insecticide-treated net.
Gavi, UNICEF, WHO and other partners are supporting the Ministry of Health in the preparation, acceptance and introduction of the malaria vaccine. The support ranges from developing vaccine implementation plans, communication strategies, conducting health professional training and community engagement, and ensuring sufficient cold chain capacity.
Road traffic deaths rise in the African region, but down globally, WHO report.
Brazzaville/Nairobi – Road traffic death rates in the past decade have increased significantly in the African region, with almost 250 000 lives lost on the continent’s roads in 2021 alone. Conversely, global rates fell by 5% during the same period, a new World Health Organization (WHO) report shows.
Between 2010 and 2021, the region recorded a 17% increase in road-related fatalities, according to the WHO Status report on road safety 2023 for the African region – the latest update. The region accounts for nearly one-fifth of all road deaths globally, despite being home to only 15% of the world’s population, and 3% of its vehicles.
The report attributes the rise to multiple factors, including inadequate road safety laws and standards. No country in the region currently has laws that meet the best practice standards for the five key road safety behavioural risk factors: speeding, drink driving, non-use of motorcycle helmets, seatbelts and child restraints.
“The findings of this report point to a serious public health concern for African countries, with hundreds of thousands of lives being lost unnecessarily. As WHO, we’re committed to working hand in hand with countries to tackle this preventable threat and continue to fully support all efforts to make our roads safer for motorists and pedestrians alike,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa.
According to the report, males aged between 15 and 64 years are the main victims of road traffic crashes. Vulnerable road users such as motorcyclists, cyclists and pedestrians are worst affected, with road-related deaths of motorcyclists doubling in the past 10 years.
Few countries have made progress to establish transport systems that cater to alternate modes of transport, such as bicycles, motorcycles or pedestrians, as well as efficient public transport. These so-called multimodal transport systems have been determined to be more equitable and environmentally-friendly, and safer for road users.
Currently, Africa is one of the fastest growing markets for used vehicles. Since the 2013 Status report, total vehicle registration has almost doubled, while two- and three-wheel vehicle registration has tripled. Only 13 countries have national strategies to promote walking and cycling.
Although there has been progress to introduce laws governing safety equipment in vehicles, pedestrian protection remains largely unaddressed. Additionally, road infrastructure safety ratings are notably low, with only a small percentage meeting acceptable standards for various road users, the report found.
WHO is working with countries to strengthen the key road safety pillars, through advocacy, technical support, awareness-raising and training. This improved the capacity of countries, like Zambia, to collect and report road traffic deaths data.
Currently, most road traffic data systems in Africa capture only road-related deaths, excluding information about injuries and their severity, including medium- and long-term consequences such as disability. Post-crash care services in the region are also inadequate or unavailable in most countries; fewer than one-third have services that meet recommended levels of access to pre-hospital care, emergency care, and treatment and rehabilitation services.
To achieve the United Nations General Assembly target of halving the global number of deaths and injuries from road traffic crashes by 2030, WHO recommends concerted efforts to implement a range of interventions to strengthen national road safety strategies in Africa. These include policies that promote sustainable transportation systems, improved legislative road safety frameworks, investment in data management systems, improved post-crash response, and research tailored to the continent’s unique challenges.
WHO Steps Up Cross-Regional Efforts for Sudan’s Humanitarian Emergency.
Adre – As millions flee war and hunger in Sudan, senior leadership from WHO’s Africa and Eastern Mediterranean Regions converged in Chad, which hosts the largest number of Sudanese refugees, to assess the urgent health needs of people impacted by this complex and deteriorating humanitarian crisis.
The mission aims to optimize WHO operations in Chad, Sudan, and the offices of the African Region (AFRO) and the Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMRO) to serve affected communities with crucial medical care and scale up cross-border operations for humanitarian assistance into the Darfur states of Sudan.
“As WHO’s Representative for Sudan, it is difficult to see this level of suffering among the refugees. They shared stories of violence, loss, and hunger. With the health system severely degraded – all 241 health facilities in Central Darfur have sustained damage – disease spreading, and famine looming, it is increasingly challenging to meet the soaring health needs. If we don’t act with urgency, we will see higher morbidity, mortality, and transgenerational impact of the current conflict,” said Dr. Shible Sahbani.
Hunger is rising at devastating rates. The Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC), the global authority on famine, says Sudan is facing the worst levels of acute food insecurity ever recorded by the IPC in the country. In the last six months, the number of people facing high levels of acute food insecurity has increased by 45% from 17.7 million to 25.6 million.
WHO’s cross-regional priorities include scaling up cross-border operations to Sudan, particularly into Darfur, which has been largely cut off from humanitarian assistance.  But lack of access imposed by parties to the conflict and reduced resources – only 18% of the Sudan Humanitarian Response has been funded - severely constrains the response. Opening the Adre border crossing between Chad and Sudan to allow humanitarian supplies in would be lifesaving.
WHO’s Representative in Chad, Dr. Anya Blanche, said: “The people of Chad have been incredibly hospitable and offered food, water, and shelter for the refugees coming in, but the needs are overwhelming. Our priority is to create integrated health systems for refugees and host populations that not only address immediate medical needs, but also develop Chad’s healthcare capacity in the long run so the future of the people is not dependent on aid.”
The small town of Adre in Eastern Chad, originally home to 40 000 people, has seen a sixfold increase in its population. Over 600 000 Sudanese and 180 000 Chadian returnees have arrived in Adre since the beginning of the conflict in April 2023.
Most refugees have survived multiple displacements as the violence that started in Khartoum escalated to different parts of Sudan. They have crossed the border with gunshot wounds, having survived rape and sexual violence, and walked for days without sufficient food for months.
In mid-April, marking one year to the conflict, the number of people displaced by conflict was nearly 8.7 million. In three months alone, this has increased by over 45%, with 12.7 million people estimated to be displaced today.  Over 10 million people are displaced within Sudan, while 2 million have sought refuge into six neighbouring countries.
Dr. Thierno Baldé, Coordinator for WHO Regional Emergency Hub for West and Central Africa, said: “We have seen the suffering of the people here. They have nothing and are exposed to many diseases, including epidemic-prone diseases. Humanitarian aid actors are present, but funding is minimal. At WHO, we are working collectively between the two regions to make our operations as resource-efficient as possible.
With the seasonal rains here, minimal shelter, and dismal living conditions, there are heightened fears of disease outbreaks such as malaria and cholera, that could lead to yet another layer of suffering.
Regional Emergency Director for EMRO, Dr. Richard Brennan, stressed the need for global solidarity and attention. “This dynamic and catastrophic crisis is getting very little attention by the international community. We can do more, and we certainly need to do more. Peace, access and resources are vital to protect the lives and livelihoods of the Sudanese people.”
Election of new WHO Regional Director for Africa: candidates’ forum.
Brazzaville – To strengthen transparency around the election of the next World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Director for the African Region, a live forum of candidates will be held on Monday 22 July 2024, 09:30−16:00 Brazzaville time.
The forum, which will be presided by Hon Edwin Dikoloti, Minister of Health of Botswana and current Chair of the WHO Regional Committee for Africa, was agreed by WHO Member States in the Region. Candidates will be given platform to detail their experience and expertise, and to present the vision of what they hope to achieve during their tenure to deliver on the core mandates of WHO in the African Region.
The four candidates (in country alphabetical order) are:
The candidates will each give a presentation of no more than 20 minutes.
Selection of questions
Each Member State joining the virtual forum may ask questions if it so wishes.
After each candidate has made an oral presentation, the Chair will pick the tokens randomly, one-by-
one, until the time available is exhausted. After each token is drawn, the corresponding Member States will be invited to ask a question, and the candidate invited to provide an answer.
Questions and Answers
Member States will have up to one minute to ask one question only. Multiple part questions will not be permitted. Candidates will have up to three minutes to respond to each question. Each interview will conclude when the 40 minutes for the interview have elapsed, even if there are pending questions. However, a candidate will be permitted to complete their answer to the question being addressed when the 40 minutes elapse.
Timekeeping
A clock will be displayed on the screen to assist the participants to keep within the time limits during both parts of the interview.
The event will be livestreamed in English, French and Portuguese on WHO Regional Office for Africa social media channels and website through the links below:
WHO Africa releases groundbreaking guidance to boost fight against sickle cell disease .
Brazzaville – World Health Organization (WHO) in the African Region today released groundbreaking new guidance to help strengthen efforts to address the growing threat of sickle cell disease in the region.
Significant for their integrated and holistic approach, the new technical documents offer detailed, actionable strategies and insights to support countries to improve quality of care, make treatment more accessible and boost overall health outcomes.
Despite notable advances in sickle cell disease treatment globally, including newborn screening, hydroxyurea therapy, gene therapy, improved management strategies and expanded immunization programmes that have reduced mortality rates in higher-income countries, significant challenges remain in ensuring equitable access to these treatments in low- and middle-income countries, particularly in the African region.
An estimated 240 000 children on the continent are born with sickle cell disease annually, up to 80% of whom will die from severe infections or acute chest syndrome before age five – the highest sickle cell disease-related childhood death rate worldwide.
“As we continue the fight against sickle cell disease, we are confident that this guidance for countries will serve as a valuable new addition to their toolkit, specifically because the guidance is tailored to the African reality, where a multi-faceted approach is key,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa.
The new WHO Africa guidance documents, entitled Guidance Framework for Sickle Cell Disease Management and Harmonized Guide for Sickle Cell Disease Management in Africa, provide countries with strategic guidance for policies, comprehensive care plans and advocacy efforts.
Together, these documents form the WHO SICKLE Package of Interventions for Sickle Cell Disease Management. The SICKLE package aims to provide a holistic and integrated approach to managing sickle cell disease, ensuring access to necessary interventions, promoting education and advocacy, enhancing the quality of care, and empowering patients and communities.
Developed with financial support from the Government of Monaco, and other partners, the package reflects a combination of the latest research, best practices and innovative approaches to sickle cell disease management, making them essential tools for health care providers, policymakers and advocates alike.
WHO Africa has been at the forefront of the fight against sickle cell disease since 2010, focusing its efforts on, among other things, disease interventions and their scale-up, and access to innovative treatment technologies and medicines.
Progress to date includes the adoption by several countries  of accurate and inexpensive point-of-care screening, together with the use of Transcranial Doppler Ultrasound screening. The availability in 11 countries of hydroxyurea, a medication that is extremely effective in preventing episodes of pain, consequently reducing visits to health care centres, is also significant.
Despite the advances, major challenges persist. These range from limited health care infrastructure, lack of awareness and education and inadequate access to comprehensive care, limited newborn screening, poor research and development, and restricted access to advanced treatments.
Stronger control efforts help to lower tobacco use in African region.
Brazzaville – Tobacco use among adolescents in the African region declined by nearly 18% between 2020 and 2022, and by 46% among adults during the same period as countries adopt stronger measures to control the use of tobacco.
The African region is on track to achieve 30% relative reduction in tobacco use prevalence by 2025 compared with 2010, according to the Fifth Edition of the World Health Organization (WHO) Global Report on Trends in Prevalence of Tobacco Use 2000–2030 report released in January 2024. In addition, 22 of the 56 countries worldwide on course to meet the target are in Africa. In 2014, the World Health Assembly adopted a global target of 30% relative reduction in tobacco use.
With support from WHO and partners, countries in the African region have introduced robust tobacco laws and regulations, including stringent controls on marketing strategies for new and emerging tobacco and nicotine products, many of which are designed to attract young people. This year, World No Tobacco Day is being commemorated under the theme "Protecting children from tobacco industry interference”. The theme aimed to mobilize international efforts to shield youth from harmful tobacco and nicotine products and the deceptive strategies applied by the tobacco industry to market their products to them.
“Countries in the African region are making commendable progress in building safeguards against tobacco use and shielding populations from its harmful impacts. We now need to capitalize on the growing momentum to ensure a healthier future for the younger generation,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa.
In the African region, 96% of countries have now ratified the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, with Mauritius becoming the first African country to fully implement the entire WHO MPOWER package of tobacco control measures to curb demand. The country is also the first in the region to implement plain packages for cigarette packs.
In addition, 37 African countries now have bans on public smoking in force, with 14 of these instituting 100% smoke-free laws in all public places. A further 16 countries have introduced graphic health warnings on tobacco products, a cost-effective and powerful way to boost public awareness of associated health risks. In Mauritania, this contributed to a reduction in tobacco use among people aged from 16 to 64 years, from 18% to 10% between 2012 and 2021.
Leveraging cost as a deterrent, WHO supported countries to institute progressive tobacco tax policies, resulting in price increases in 13 countries in the past five years. In effect, the average total tax share of the retail price of most tobacco brands across the region rose from 37% in 2016, to 41% in 2023.
WHO also introduced innovative measures to counter increasing tobacco leaf production, encouraging over 5000 tobacco farmers in Kenya and Zambia to switch to alternative crops. This had the dual benefit of reducing tobacco production, while promoting food and nutrition security, environmental protection, and women empowerment and gender equity.
While the African region is witnessing declining use of tobacco, the rapid population growth is still preventing notable reductions from translating to lower actual numbers of users, according to the WHO report.
The focus on further reductions in tobacco use among adolescents is key, given that the sustainability of the tobacco and nicotine market relies heavily on recruiting new, young users. The tobacco industry continues to target the African region as a viable investment destination not only because of its young population, but also its rapidly growing economies, cheap labour and access to land for tobacco cultivation.
Timely outbreak response, enhanced surveillance halts wild poliovirus transmission in Southern Africa.
Brazzaville/Lilongwe/Maputo – Following thorough assessments in Malawi and Mozambique, an independent Polio Outbreak Response Assessment Team (OBRA) today recommended the closure of the wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) outbreak in Malawi and Mozambique, marking a significant milestone in the fight against polio in the African region.
The last WPV1 case in the African Region, linked to a strain circulating in Pakistan, was reported in Mozambique´s Tete Province in August 2022. A total of nine cases were detected in Mozambique and neighbouring Malawi, where the outbreak was declared in February 2022. In a coordinated response, more than 50 million children have been vaccinated to date against the virus in 5 countries in southern Africa.
The meticulous evaluation carried out by the OBRA team included two in-depth field reviews and supplementary data review, concluding that there is no evidence of ongoing wild polio transmission. The assessment considered the quality of the outbreak response, including the overall population immunity, supplementary immunization campaigns, routine immunization coverage, surveillance systems, vaccine management practices, and the level of community engagement.
The successful stopping of this outbreak reflects the unwavering commitment and collaborative efforts of African governments, health workers, communities and Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) partners, including the invaluable support of Rotarians on the ground. Through robust surveillance, quality vaccination campaigns and enhanced community engagement, both countries have effectively controlled the spread of the virus, safeguarding the health and well-being of their children.
"This achievement is a testament to what can be accomplished when we work together with dedication and determination," said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. "I commend the governments of Malawi and Mozambique, as well as all those involved in the response, for their tireless efforts to contain the outbreak. It is now imperative that we continue to strengthen our immunization systems, enhance surveillance, and reach every child with life-saving vaccines."
Health authorities, with high-quality technical support from GPEI, have put in place national prevention strategies in Malawi and Mozambique, as well as in all districts bordering other countries involved in the response. These include Tanzania, Zimbabwe and Zambia.
To date, more than 100 million vaccine doses have been administered in the most at-risk areas. The strategy to get ahead of this outbreak and stop it before it got out of hand relied on detailed micro-planning, including mapping of cross-border communities, migratory routes, cross-border entry/exit points, and transit routes for each of the cross-border facilities. Synchronization and coordination of vaccination plans across five countries, as well as the monitoring of vaccination activities, proved key to identifying and reaching all eligible children in the cross-border areas, to avoid the risk of paralysis due to the virus.
"The official closure of the outbreak is truly a success due to unfaltering determination and strong collaboration between the governments of Mozambique, Malawi and neighbouring countries, as well as between all partners and health workers. I want to particularly recognise the strong efforts of the vaccination teams working on the frontline to reach every last child,” said Etleva Kadilli, UNICEF Regional Director for Eastern and Southern Africa.  “Going forward, routine immunisation must remain high up the priority list; no child is safe from polio until all children are vaccinated."
To enhance polio surveillance, over the past two years, 15 new wastewater surveillance sites were established in the affected countries. These sites have a critical role to play in detecting silent circulating poliovirus in wastewater, ensuring that quality samples are sent to laboratories for timely confirmation and response to poliovirus presence.
Additionally, countries have scaled up efforts to protect children in high-risk areas by strengthening surveillance, and data and information management. World Health Organization (WHO) in the African Region’s Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Centre has analysed spatial and geographic data on visual maps, providing geographic real-time coverage information, including locating missing settlements, to improve vaccination coverage.
"Closing polio outbreaks is possible when national governments, local health workers, community mobilizers, and global partners come together to prioritize a rapid and timely response to protect children from this devastating disease," said Dr. Chris Elias, president of Global Development at the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. "Malawi, Mozambique, and the entire Southern-African region are setting the example for what it takes to urgently improve vaccination campaigns and disease surveillance systems. Commitments like these will help us achieve a world free of all forms of poliovirus."
Health experts, the OBRA team and GPEI coordinators on the ground underscored the pivotal role of enhanced polio surveillance, high quality community engagement in vaccination campaigns and timely outbreak response, including rapid deployment of experts and other field responders, to curb the virus.
Note to editors:
The notification of imported wild poliovirus in 2022 did not alter the certification of the African region as free of indigenous wild polio in August 2020, as the strain that was confirmed in southern Africa was imported.
Polio has no cure and can cause irreversible paralysis. However, the disease can be prevented and eradicated through administration of a safe, simple and effective vaccine.
As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the risk of international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency, ensure the vaccination of residents and long-term visitors and restrict at the point of departure travel of individuals, who have not been vaccinated or cannot prove the vaccination status.
The Global Polio Eradication Initiative is spearheaded by national governments, WHO, Rotary International, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), UNICEF, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance.  Since 1988, the incidence of wild poliovirus has been reduced by more than 99%, from more 350,000 annual cases in more than 125 endemic countries, to four cases in 2024 from two endemic countries (Pakistan and Afghanistan). In 2023, only 12 cases of WPV1 were detected globally. For more information, please visit www.polioeradication.org
Enhancing capacity for malaria vaccine introduction and rollout in Africa through experience sharing.
Accra, Ghana - Since 2019, Ghana, Kenya and Malawi have been rolling out malaria vaccines, with over 2.5 million children already receiving at least one dose of the life-saving vaccine that is protecting children from deadly malaria.
In 2024, more than 20 countries in Africa are to introduce the vaccine into routine immunization, with Cameroon, Burkina Faso, Benin, Liberia and Sierra Leone already leading the way. The scale-up of malaria vaccines in Africa will increase access to malaria prevention and save tens of thousands of young lives every year.
As part of efforts to support the wider introduction and rollout of the malaria vaccine, the World Health Organization (WHO), PATH and other partners convened stakeholders from  Nigeria, Guinea, Cote d’Ivoire and Liberia to learn from Ghana’s malaria vaccination experience on 16-18 April in Accra, Ghana, and ensure adequate preparation towards new introductions and rollout across these countries.
Drawn from ministries of health, WHO and UNICEF, participants also benefitted from the experience of other countries that have already introduced the vaccines such as Burkina Faso, Cameroon and Sierra Leone.
“Having been delivering malaria vaccine to children across seven regions, Ghana’s experience and lessons will be key to the introduction and rollout of the vaccine in countries that are yet to introduce,” says Dr Frank Lule, the Officer-In-Charge of WHO Ghana.
Participants gained insights into vaccine introduction, risk communication, readiness monitoring, supervision, and data management among others. Additionally, a field visit to malaria vaccination centers was organized to provide participants with firsthand experience in Ghana’s vaccination process.
“In workshops like this, when we exchange information, the result and the impact tend to be greater efficiency with the resources that we have to reach children and to vaccinate,” says Evan Simpson, Director of Vaccine Implementation, PATH.
As Africa continues to shoulder 94%  of the global malaria burden, the WHO and its partners are strengthening malaria control efforts with vaccines being the latest in the control toolbox. In January 2024, the WHO Regional Office for Africa established the Accelerating Malaria Vaccine Introduction and Rollout in Africa (AMVIRA). This initiative aims to strengthen the provision of state-of-the-art technical support to Member States in their efforts to introduce and roll out malaria vaccines while strengthening partners’ coordination at national, regional, and global levels effectively and efficiently.
WHO and partners also leveraged the workshop to address information gaps and share lessons and best practices to ensure successful vaccine introduction and rollout in countries that are yet to do so.
For participants, the knowledge gained from the country peer learning workshop will help shape their strategies towards effective malaria vaccine rollout.
“One of the key lessons I have picked up from Ghana’s experiences is the role of effective coordination and collaboration. Though we have a coordination team, we are going to strengthen this team through the addition of more stakeholders, including communities and civil society organizations,” says Dr Yao Kossia Deputy Manager, the Expanded Vaccination Programme, Côte d'Ivoire.
Highlighting the significance of the knowledge gained, Dr Garba Ahmed-Rufai, the Director for Disease Control and Immunization of Nigeria noted “What we have learned is programming in terms of the rollout, and the timing of the doses, and the lessons learnt. And knowing what the problems are from the other countries, we would just adjust accordingly, so that we can overcome all of that”.
In addition to facilitating cross-learning, WHO through the AMVIRA initiative is enhancing the capacity of countries to ensure effective introductions and rollout. There has been the deployment of experts in Immunization, data management, risk communication, and external communication to assist 5 countries in efficiently planning and delivering vaccines.
A similar workshop has been held in Cameroon, with more countries expected to participate in other workshops in Benin and Malawi.
Namibia reaches key milestone in eliminating mother-to-child transmission of HIV and hepatitis B  .
Windhoek – Namibia has become the first country in Africa – and the first high-burden country in the world - to reach a significant milestone on the path towards eliminating vertical mother-to-child transmission of both HIV and viral hepatitis B.
Eastern and Southern Africa is home to more than half the world’s HIV burden and Africa accounts for two thirds of new hepatitis B infections globally. Namibia is home to more than 200 000 people living with HIV and new infections disproportionately impact females.
Progress is possible. Globally, 2.5 million children have avoided vertical transmission of HIV since 2010, 28 000 of whom are in Namibia. HIV testing among pregnant women is almost universally available across the country and access to treatment has led to a 70% reduction of vertical transmission in the last 20 years. In 2022, only 4% cent of babies born to mothers living with HIV acquired the virus. Almost 80% of infants received a timely birth dose of hepatitis B vaccine, one of the key metrics of success on the path to elimination.
Namibia has integrated primary health care with antenatal, child health and sexual and reproductive health services. The government committed stable domestic finance to national health programmes, offering widely accessible, quality and free of charge clinical services and support.
Based on specified criteria, the World Health Organization (WHO) has awarded Namibia “silver tier” status for progress on reducing hepatitis B and “bronze tier” for progress on HIV. Namibia’s achievement follows a concerted strategy to curb the transmission of hepatitis B, HIV and syphilis. WHO's Triple Elimination Initiative aims to safeguard the health of mothers and children and affirm the rights of every child to be born free from the burden of these viruses.
“This is a landmark achievement by Namibia that demonstrates the life-saving possibilities of committed political leadership and effective implementation of public health priorities,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “With concerted efforts, we can accelerate progress to reach the goals of ending mother-to-child transmission of HIV, hepatitis B and syphilis – the triple elimination.”
The validation process, led by WHO in collaboration with UNICEF, UNAIDS and UNFPA, evaluates data and standardizes milestones for eliminating diseases. Among other factors, WHO certifies a country as having attained silver tier status when the hepatitis B vaccine is given to 50% or more newborn babies. Bronze certification is awarded to countries which have reduced the vertical transmission of HIV from mother to child to less than 5%.
“In many countries we are failing our children by not reaching them with the same treatment with which we reach their mothers and other adults,” said Anne Githuku-Shongwe, UNAIDS Regional Director, East and Southern Africa. “Namibia has fought against this injustice and we are proud to celebrate their immense effort to leave no child behind. They serve as a beacon for the entire region.”
The triple Elimination Initiative promotes an end to vertical transmission of HIV, syphilis and hepatitis B virus, all of which are prevalent in low- and middle-income countries. It encourages countries to integrate services, using a person-centred approach to improve health outcomes for mothers and children.
“Namibia has met this milestone by taking a truly integrated approach to the HIV response from early on,” said Etleva Kadilli, UNICEF Regional Director for Eastern and Southern Africa. “The country has not addressed HIV in isolation as a single disease, but as part of a broader health and development agenda, encompassing maternal and child health for all. Namibia has reached mothers and their children, even in the most rural areas.”
Namibia’s first National Elimination Strategy was initiated in 2014, followed by the National Roadmap to Elimination of HIV and syphilis in 2020, with viral hepatitis B added later. Namibia established a multisectoral National Validation Committee, in line with WHO guidance, for elimination of the three diseases.
African region’s first-ever health workforce investment charter launched.
Windhoek – The World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Office for Africa and partner organizations today launched the region’s first-ever health investment charter that aims to align and drive sustainable investment in the health workforce.
With a bold target of halving the African region’s critical 6.1-million health workforce shortage by 2030, the African Health Workforce Investment Charter will mobilize and align domestic and partner funding to strengthen, grow and retain the continent’s health workforce, especially in rural and primary health care settings.
“Any discussion about the delivery of health care services must acknowledge that, for these services to be rendered and rendered effectively, we need feet on the ground,” said Honourable Dr Saara Kuugongelwa-Amadhila, Namibia’s Prime Minister. “For the health professionals to do their work effectively, they must be well resourced and capacitated in the best ways possible.”
In addition to shortages, the African region faces many other health workforce challenges, including, rising unemployment, excessive out-migration and low quality of training. Low health investment and limited prioritization of the health workforce have critically exposed health systems. Investment in health, especially from domestic sources, is still low and inadequate for many countries to meet the universal health coverage and ensure health security
“The numbers of Africans who have left the continent in search of greener pastures in other parts of the world are staggering. It is a matter that needs to be addressed as a top priority for African governments and indeed all those who wish to see a shift in the historical as well as current trends,” said Honourable Dr Kalumbi Shangula, Minister of Health and Social Services of Namibia.
The charter launched today brought together the health workforce investment efforts of all stakeholders, including national governments, the private health sector, civil society, external financing institutions and development partners in Africa.
“By investing in the health workforce, we not only address the challenges within the sector but also generate dividends in education, employment and gender equality,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “These investments will contribute to our sustained efforts in attracting more resources and improving the quality of our health workforce.”
Investing in the health workforce will have positive spin-offs in the form of decent jobs, particularly for women and youth who often face barriers to employment. By providing opportunities for education, training and career progression, the Charter will immensely contribute to the economic empowerment of these demographics and fundamentally support inclusive economic growth.
Additionally, health labour force investment also brings multiple returns for health and economies, increasing life expectancy and job creation, while accelerating countries towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and universal health coverage.
For every US$1 invested in health and sustaining the jobs of health workers, the potential return is as much as US$9. It has also been demonstrated that half of all economic growth globally over the past decade resulted from improvements in health, and that for every added year of life expectancy, the economic growth rate is boosted by 4%.
“Studies show that investments in the health sector yield substantial economic returns, estimating a nine-to-one return on investment. The new narrative that we are promoting is to transform the health sector to move from liability to an asset for the economy of our countries,” said Dr Jean Kaseya, Director-General of the Africa Centre for Disease Control and Prevention.
The Africa Health Workforce Investment Charter was inaugurated in Namibia during the Health Workforce Investment Forum being held from 6 to 8 May 2024. Efforts will continue to be made to engage multisectoral stakeholders and partners on their experiences and achievements, and mobilize commitments, partnerships and investments to deliver on the principles and actions enshrined in the investment charter.
Call for Experts: Regional Validation Committee (RVC) on the Elimination of Mother-to-Child Transmission (eMTCT) of HIV, Syphilis and Hepatitis B.
The World Health Organization (WHO) is seeking experts to serve as members one of the Regional Validation Committee (RVC) on the Elimination of Mother-to-Child Transmission (eMTCT) of HIV, Syphilis and Hepatitis B. This “Call for experts” provides information about the advisory group in question, the expert profiles being sought, the process to express interest, and the process of selection.
The global community has committed to the elimination of mother-to-child transmission (MTCT), of HIV, syphilis and hepatitis B virus (HBV) as a public health priority. The purpose of the elimination goal is to ensure the availability of quality reproductive and maternal and child health (MCH) services to reduce and control the transmission of HIV, syphilis and HBV between mothers and their offspring and to provide the best available treatment to the mother, such that new infections are reduced to a very low level and ceases to be a public health concern.
The World Health Organization (WHO) released the first edition of the guideline for global validation of elimination of mother-to-child (eMTCT) transmission HIV and syphilis in 2014. The guidance was further updated in 2017 to include revised validation criteria for eMTCT of HIV, an expanded description of the surveillance case definition of congenital syphilis, criteria for evaluation of human rights, gender equality and community engagement, etc. In 2021, the third edition of the guideline was released which includes validation of Hepatitis B virus (HBV) eMTCT, underlining the importance of elimination of eMTCT of three infections, HIV, Syphilis and HBV. The guidelines provide standardized processes and consensus-developed criteria to validate eMTCT of HIV, HBV and Syphilis, and emphasize country-led accountability, multilevel collaboration, including engagement of women living with HIV or HBV. Validation is a term used to attest that a country has successfully met the criteria for eMTCT of HIV and/or Syphilis and/or HBV.
The achievement of elimination of eMTCT or vertical transmission, of HIV, syphilis and HBV is a tremendous accomplishment, requiring health ministry–led accountability, rigorous data analysis, intensive programme assessment and multilevel collaboration at the national, regional, and global levels of a set of impact and process indicators and the fulfilment of the four foundational requirements for (i) data quality (ii) strong programmes (iii) laboratory quality and (iv) human rights, gender equality and community engagement.
Impact targets for validation
The process for validation requires validation structures at national, regional and global levels.
As per WHO governance guidance, at national level, a National Validation Secretariat (NVS), and National Validation Committee (NVC) should be established and engage with the Ministry of Health, WHO Country Office, women living with HIV and relevant United Nations partners such as UNAIDS, UNICEF and UNFPA. At the regional level, WHO regional office should host a Regional Validation Secretariat (RVS), which works in close partnership with UNAIDS, UNICEF and other relevant United Nations partners.
WHO will establish and convene the Regional Validation Committee (RVC) on the Elimination of Mother-to-Child Transmission (eMTCT) of HIV, Syphilis and Hepatitis B in the World Health Organization African Region (WHO AFRO) and shall provide the secretariat for the RVC, including necessary scientific, technical, administrative and other support. At the global level, the Global Validation Secretariat (GVS) and the Global Validation Advisory Committee (GVAC) are involved in the validation process. At all levels, committee members should have experience in one of the four foundational requirements for validation and should be able to act independently when reviewing and assessing whether a country has achieved or maintained the elimination targets. Committee members at all levels should serve as independent experts and not represent government or nongovernmental entities in their position.
In its capacity as an advisory body to WHO, the RVC shall have the following functions:
RVC meetings may be held in open and/or closed session, as decided by the Chairperson in consultation with WHO.
At the invitation of the Chairperson, observers may be asked to present their personal views and/or the policies of their organization. Observers will not participate in the process of adopting recommendations of the RVC.
The Regional Validation Committee (RVC) on the Elimination of Mother-to-Child Transmission (eMTCT) of HIV, Syphilis and Hepatitis B will be multidisciplinary, with members who have a range of technical knowledge, skills and experience relevant to the underlisted areas. Approximately 15 members may be selected. WHO welcomes expressions of interest from candidates with expertise in the following areas:
After submission, your expression of interest will be reviewed by WHO.  Due to an expected high volume of interest, only selected individuals will be informed.
Members of WHO advisory groups (AGs) must be free of any real, potential or apparent conflicts of interest. To this end, applicants are required to complete the WHO Declaration of Interests for WHO Experts, and the selection as a member of a AG is, amongst other things, dependent on WHO determining that there is no conflict of interest or that any identified conflicts could be appropriately managed (in addition to WHO’s evaluation of an applicant’s experience, expertise and motivation and other criteria).
All AG members will serve in their individual expert capacity and shall not represent any governments, any commercial industries or entities, any research, academic or civil society organizations, or any other bodies, entities, institutions or organizations. They are expected to fully comply with the Code of Conduct for WHO Experts (https://www.who.int/about/ethics/declarations-of-interest). AG members will be expected to sign and return a completed confidentiality undertaking prior to the beginning of the first meeting.
At any point during the selection process, telephone interviews may be scheduled between an applicant and the WHO Secretariat to enable WHO to ask questions relating to the applicant’s experience and expertise and/or  to assess whether the applicant meets the criteria for membership in the relevant AG.
The selection of members of the AGs will be made by WHO in its sole discretion, taking into account  the following (non-exclusive) criteria: relevant technical expertise; experience in international and country policy work; communication skills; and ability to work constructively with people from different cultural backgrounds and orientations .The selection of AG members will also take account of the need for diverse perspectives from different regions, especially from low and middle-income countries, and for gender balance.
If selected by WHO, proposed members will be sent an invitation letter and a Memorandum of Agreement. Appointment as a member of a AG will be subject to the proposed member returning to WHO the countersigned copy of these two documents.
WHO reserves the right to accept or reject any expression of interest , to annul the open call process and reject all expressions of interest at any time without incurring any liability to the affected applicant or applicants and without any obligation to inform the affected applicant or applicants of the grounds for WHO's action. WHO may also decide, at any time, not to proceed with the establishment of the AG, disband an existing TAG or modify the work of the AG.
WHO shall not in any way be obliged to reveal, or discuss with any applicant, how an expression of interest was assessed, or to provide any other information relating to the evaluation/selection process or to state the reasons for not choosing a member.
WHO may publish the names and a short biography of the selected individuals on the WHO internet.
AG members will not be remunerated for their services in relation to the AG or otherwise. Travel and accommodation expenses of AG members to participate in AG meetings will be covered by WHO in accordance with its applicable policies, rules and procedures.
The appointment will be limited in time as indicated in the letter of appointment.
Boosting efforts to transform care for severe chronic diseases in Africa.
Dar es Salaam – Health experts from across Africa, policymakers, civil society organizations and partners meeting for the first-ever conference on strengthening efforts to address the burden of severe chronic disease have called for increased recognition of the emergency presented by noncommunicable diseases and the premature deaths they cause.
The International Conference on PEN-Plus in Africa (ICPPA) meeting, held from 22 to 25 April 2024, highlighted “grossly inequitable access to prevention, diagnosis, treatment and ongoing care” and committed to advocate for increased focus on chronic and severe noncommunicable diseases (NCD) within existing health systems, and extending prevention, diagnosis, treatment and quality care to the primary health level.
The meeting in Tanzania’s commercial capital Dar es Salaam called on governments to provide leadership in public health to ensure adequate and quality services, to act to reduce the known risk factors for NCDs and to increase domestic investments.
The conference, which was dedicated to mainstreaming strategies to alleviate the burden of severe chronic diseases at first-level referral health facilities, highlighted the urgency of decentralizing care for type 1 diabetes, sickle cell disease, and rheumatic and congenital heart diseases, to save millions of lives over the next decade, including those of many children and young adults afflicted by these conditions.
In the African region, healthcare services for severe NCDs are predominantly confined to major urban centres, leaving countless individuals without sufficient care and burdened with high financial costs.
Hosted by the Government of Tanzania, in collaboration with the World Health Organization (WHO) in the African region and other partners including Helmsley Charitable Trust, the three-day event provided a platform for health experts, policymakers, civil society organizations, donors, private sector representatives and NCDs affected persons, survivors and community advocates to expedite political and financial backing for PEN-Plus, an innovative healthcare delivery model birthed in Africa.
“We are honoured to have you all here for this critical conference at a time when hundreds of thousands of Africans of all ages suffer preventable, premature deaths from NCDs due to health inequities. This is a chance for us to unite to advance regional efforts to tackle the crisis, by investing in and scaling up PEN-Plus,” said Hon. Ummy Mwalimu, Minister of Health of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Participants delved into strategies to reinforce NCD management within health systems continent-wide and sought collaborative opportunities to align PEN-Plus with other regional public health programmes.
“Africa is severely affected, and in the region, more than any place in the world, NCDs are called ‘the silent epidemic’,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “Africa must invest more now in addressing NCDs with adequate and sustained resources. With support from partners, we aim to strengthen the implementation of the PEN-Plus Regional Strategy, mainstream the prevention and control of chronic and severe NCDs in the region and ensure that people living with these chronic and severe conditions receive the lifesaving care they deserve.”
All 47 member states of the WHO African region have endorsed the model as their official strategy for caring for individuals with severe NCDs. To date, 17 countries have initiated PEN-Plus, with 11 actively implementing the programme.
The PEN-Plus strategy expands upon the WHO PEN (Package of Essential Noncommunicable disease interventions), which decentralizes care for common NCDs to primary healthcare facilities. PEN-Plus extends this care to first-level referral facilities, such as district hospitals, and has demonstrated significant success in increasing patient access to treatment for severe NCDs, improving patient outcomes.
“PEN-Plus addresses a critical gap in health care for the world’s poorest billion, bringing lifesaving care for severe NCDs to first-level rural hospitals for the first time. It also bridges major gaps in health systems for training, mentorship and referral pathways,” said Dr Ana Mocumbi, co-chair of the NCDI Poverty Network.
The Government of Tanzania, WHO Africa, and The Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust co-sponsored the conference, with the NCDI Poverty Network serving as a technical partner.
"PEN-Plus showcases the lifesaving impact of collaborating with local health leaders and designing health systems around people," said Dr Gina Agiostratidou, type 1 diabetes Program Director for the Helmsley Charitable Trust. "Now, children with noncommunicable diseases in rural areas can receive the care they need to lead full, vibrant lives. At ICPPA, we have had the opportunity to join partners in discussing how we can expand the program to reach even more communities."
The consensus among experts, leaders, and partners at the conference is clear: PEN-Plus is a reliable system with a proven track record, capable of delivering lifesaving care to those with severe NCDs in rural sub-Saharan Africa  – investing in PEN-Plus represents a historic and pivotal collective action that will save and improve millions of lives, reduce healthcare costs, enhance health system capacities, boost productivity, promote equity, and contribute to achieving Universal Health Coverage and the Sustainable Development Goals.
Major step in malaria prevention as three West African countries roll out vaccine .
Cotonou/Freetown/Monrovia — In a significant step forward for malaria prevention in Africa, three countries—Benin, Liberia and Sierra Leone—today launched a large-scale rollout of the life-saving malaria vaccine targeting millions of children across the three West African nations. The vaccine rollout, announced on World Malaria Day, seeks to further scale up vaccine deployment in the African region.
Today’s launch brings to eight the number of countries on the continent to offer the malaria vaccine as part of the childhood immunization programmes, extending access to more comprehensive malaria prevention. Several of the more than 30 countries in the African region that have expressed interest in the vaccine are scheduled to roll it out in the next year through support from Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, as efforts continue to widen its deployment in the region in coordination with other prevention measures such as long-lasting insecticidal nets and seasonal malaria chemoprevention.
Benin, which received 215 900 doses, has added the malaria vaccine to its Expanded Programme on Immunization. The malaria vaccine should be provided in a schedule of 4 doses in children from around 5 months of age.
“The introduction of the malaria vaccine in the Expanded Programme on Immunization for our children is a major step forward in the fight against this scourge. I would like to reassure that the malaria vaccines are safe and effective and contribute to the protection of our children against this serious and fatal diseases,” said Prof Benjamin Hounkpatin, Minister of Health of Benin.
In Liberia, the vaccine was launched in the southern Rivercess County and will be rolled out afterwards in five other counties which have high malaria burden. At least 45 000 children are expected to benefit from the 112 000 doses of the available vaccine.
"For far too long, malaria has stolen the laughter and dreams of our children. But today, with this vaccine and the unwavering commitment of our communities, healthcare workers and our partners, including GAVI, UNICEF and WHO, we break the chain. We have a powerful tool that will protect them from this devastating illness and related deaths, ensuring their right to health and a brighter future. Let's end malaria in Liberia and pave the way for a healthier, more just society," said Dr Louise Kpoto, Liberia’s Minister of Health.
Two safe and effective vaccines — RTS,S and R21 — recommended by World Health Organization (WHO), are a breakthrough for child health and malaria control. A pilot malaria vaccine programme in Ghana, Kenya and Malawi reached over 2 million children from 2019 to 2023, showing a significant reduction in malaria illness and a 13% drop in overall child mortality and substantial reductions in hospitalizations.
In Sierra Leone, the first doses were administered to children at a health centre in Western Area Rural where the authorities kicked off the rollout of 550 000 vaccine doses. The vaccine will then be delivered in health facilities nationwide.
“With the new, safe and efficacious malaria vaccine, we now have an additional tool to fight this disease. In combination with insecticide-treated nets, effective diagnosis and treatment, and indoor spraying, no child should die from malaria infection,” said Dr Austin Demby, Minister of Health of Sierra Leone.
Malaria remains a huge health challenge in the African region, which is home to 11 countries that carry approximately 70% of the global burden of malaria. The region accounted for 94% of global malaria cases and 95% of all malaria deaths in 2022, according to the World Malaria Report 2023.
“The African region is advancing in the rollout of the malaria vaccine – a game-changer in our fight against this deadly disease,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “Working with our member states and partners, we’re supporting the ongoing efforts to save the lives of young children and lower the malaria burden in the region.”
Aurelia Nguyen, Chief Programme Officer at Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, noted: “Today we celebrate more children gaining access to a new lifesaving tool to fight one of Africa’s deadliest diseases. This introduction of malaria vaccines into routine programmes in Benin, Liberia, and Sierra Leone alongside other proven interventions will help save lives and offer relief to families, communities and hard-pressed health systems.”
Progress against malaria has stalled in these high-burden African countries since 2017 due to factors including climate change, humanitarian crises, low access to and insufficient quality of health services, gender-related barriers, biological threats such as insecticide and drug resistance and global economic crises. Fragile health systems and critical gaps in data and surveillance have compounded the challenge.
To put malaria progress back on track, WHO recommends robust commitment to malaria responses at all levels, particularly in high-burden countries; greater domestic and international funding; science and data-driven malaria responses; urgent action on the health impacts of climate change; harnessing research and innovation; as well as strong partnerships for coordinated responses. WHO is also calling attention to addressing delays in malaria programme implementation.
Pioneering charter to drive up investment in Africa’s health workforce.
Brazzaville – A pioneering health investment charter, a first for the African region, is set to be launched at the African Health Workforce Investment Forum which will take place in Windhoek, Namibia from 6 – 8 May 2024. Key stakeholders will gather to consolidate efforts to drive up investment to counter critical health worker shortages.
With a bold target of halving Africa’s critical 5.3-million health workforce shortage by 2030, the African Health Workforce Investment Charter will mobilize and align domestic and partner funding to strengthen, grow and retain the continent’s health workforce, especially in rural and primary health care settings.
“Africa’s health worker sector is at a crossroads. The underinvestment in training and employing health workers, coupled with inadequate incentives to retain the workforce, has resulted in unfortunate levels of migration, both within and out of the continent.” says Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “It is time to urgently invest more and in smarter ways in our health workforce. Our future depends on it.”
Addressing the gaps necessitates a continent-wide increase in Gross Domestic Product (GDP) expenditure on health of up to 1.5%, with more than half of that dedicated to health workforce investment specifically.
Despite a 13% improvement in efficiency between 2014 and 2019, African health systems remain only 77% efficient. In effect, this means that about US$1 in every US$5 spent on health is lost to technical inefficiencies, including health workforce management. This plays a significant role in the existence of ghost workers on payrolls, absenteeism and sub-optimal performance, for example.
At the upcoming forum, stakeholders will discuss the progress made in health workforce strengthening over the last 10 years and hammer out the details of new strategies to, among other things, protect health workforce budgets, address recurrent costs, and bolster investments amid existing domestic and global economic challenges, and debt concerns.
The forum will also engage multisectoral stakeholders and partners on their experiences and achievements, and mobilize commitments, partnerships and investments to deliver on the principles and actions enshrined in the investment charter.
Investment in the health workforce has multiple returns for health and economies, increasing life expectancy and job creation, especially benefiting women and young people, while accelerating countries towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and Universal Health Coverage.
For every US$1 invested in health and sustaining the jobs of health workers, the potential return is as much as US$9. It has also been demonstrated that half of all economic growth globally over the past decade resulted from improvements in health, noting that for every added year of life expectancy, the economic growth rate is boosted by 4%.
About 170 participants are expected to attend the forum, including policy makers from the health, education, labour/employment and finance sectors, along with partners from civil society financing, bilateral and multilateral institutions.
Key partners supporting the forum include the ILO-OECD-WHO Working for Health (W4H) Programme and its Multi-Partner Trust Fund (MPTF), The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and the Frontline Health Workers Coalition.
Over 50 million lives saved in Africa through expanded immunization programme.
Brazzaville—An estimated 51.2 million lives have been saved through vaccines in the African region over the past 50 years. For every infant life saved over that period, close to 60 years of life are lived, a new report by World Health Organization (WHO) finds.
These achievements have been possible under the Expanded Programme on Immunization (EPI), a WHO initiative launched in 1974 as a global endeavour to ensure equitable access to life-saving vaccines for every child, regardless of their geographic location or socioeconomic status.
The report, which assesses the life-saving impact of vaccines, was released today at the start of this year’s African Vaccination Week and World Immunization Week being marked from 24–30 April under the theme “Safeguarding Our Future: Humanly Possible”.
With the continuous support from WHO, UNICEF and Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance and many others, today most countries in the region provide antigens for 13 vaccine-preventable diseases, up from the initial six when the EPI was introduced.
Notable achievements have been made, including reduction in measles deaths, with an estimated 19.5 million deaths averted over the last 22 years. The region has also witnessed a sharp decline in meningitis deaths by up to 39% in 2019 compared with 2000. Maternal and neonatal tetanus has nearly been eliminated in the region, and in a historic public health achievement, the African region was declared free of indigenous wild poliovirus in 2022 following years of relentless work to protect every child from the virus.
“From disease prevention to eradication the success story of vaccines is a compelling one. Millions of people are alive and healthy today thanks to the protection vaccines offer,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “We have half a century of momentum and have accomplished so much. Now we must sustain and expand vaccine equity to end the threat of vaccine-preventable diseases.”
The rollout of new vaccines such as the first ever malaria vaccine, and expansion of existing vaccines, such as for HPV, which protects against the leading cause of cervical cancer, has also set up future generations in Africa with an opportunity to thrive.
“Today we celebrate the monumental advances governments and partners have taken across Africa in the last fifty years to ensure so many more children on the continent are living past their fifth birthday thanks to vaccination,” said UNICEF Regional Director for Eastern and Southern Africa, Etleva Khadilli. “Leaders, partners and donors must strive to protect immunization gains in the region especially in the face of backsliding rates in recent years.”
“Children that are not, or not enough, vaccinated often come from communities missed across the spectrum of social services. We must focus our efforts on finding them and ensuring they receive the life-saving vaccines and other services they need. Together, with leaders and communities, we can make this a reality,” said Gilles Fagninou, the UNICEF Regional Director for West and Central Africa.
Through Gavi, an alliance of immunization partners including WHO and UNICEF established in 2000 to expand the impact of the EPI, countries are supported to deliver vaccines against vaccine-preventable diseases including others such as cervical cancer and malaria, and to respond to outbreaks of diseases such as Ebola and cholera.
“The evidence is clear: vaccines are one of the most impactful and cost-effective investments in health and development in history. Over the past two decades, Gavi has worked with 40 African countries to expand immunisation coverage while delivering new innovations like the HPV and malaria vaccines and responding to deadly outbreaks – saving millions of lives and generating billions in economic benefits,” said Thabani Maphosa, Managing Director of Country Programmes Delivery at Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance. “With climate change, crises and the threat of infectious disease on the rise it is more important than ever that governments invest in immunisation to help ensure everyone, everywhere has an equal opportunity for a safe and healthy future.”
While progress in vaccine coverage has been made, the region still faces challenges in achieving and sustaining high immunization coverage rates for most of the vaccine-preventable diseases. There are also challenges in ensuring equitable vaccine access across the continent with a significant number of children yet to receive a single dose of life-saving vaccines while others not receiving enough doses.
In addition, the disruptive impact of COVID-19 further strained immunization efforts. The region is yet to fully recover from the pandemic’s disruptions to immunization.
In 2022, coverage for the first and third doses of the diphtheria–tetanus–pertussis-containing vaccine (DTP1 and DTP3, respectively) and the first dose of the measles-containing vaccine (MCV1) in the region was estimated at 80%, 72% and 69%, respectively (all below the 2019 level). Only 13 of the 47 countries in the region achieved the global target coverage of 90% or above with DTP3 in 2022.
Efforts to address gaps in immunization coverage have been intensified through the “Big Catch-Up” initiative that aims to reach children who have been underserved or missed by routine vaccination programmes. Innovative initiatives such as the Zero-dose Immunization Programme have also been established to reach communities that are living in conflict and fragile areas with essential health services.
Further efforts are needed to accelerate progress to meet the goals of Immunization Agenda 2030, a strategy endorsed during the WHO World Health Assembly in 2020, which seeks to reduce mortality and morbidity from vaccine-preventable diseases, ensure equitable access to vaccines and strengthen immunization within primary health care. A regional framework to implement the Immunization Agenda has been adopted.
To sustain progress key strategies need to be implemented. These include controlling protracted and frequent outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases; increasing investment in health systems and infrastructure for effective vaccine delivery; enhancing surveillance systems to respond swiftly to outbreaks; addressing vaccine hesitancy and misinformation; bolstering domestic funding for immunization programmes; increasing the use of innovation and technology for better vaccine delivery; and investing in research and development for vaccine development.
African island states take fresh step towards joint medicines procurement .
Victoria ‒ In a further move towards pooled procurement of essential medicines and medical products, Ministers of Health from small African islands states established a secretariat and elected Mauritius as the host, taking critical steps to launch joint operations for increased access to affordable, quality-assured and safe medicines and medical supplies.
The pooled procurement programme, signed in 2020 by Cabo Verde, Comoros, Guinea-Bissau, Mauritius, Sao Tome & Principe and Seychelles, that form the Small Island Developing States (SIDS) from Africa, and endorsed by Madagascar, aims to coordinate the purchase of selected medicines and medical products affordably, harmonize medicines management systems, improve supplier performance and reduce procurement workload. The programme also sets the guiding principles and governance structure, including the creation of a secretariat, technical committees and a council of ministers.
The ministers, gathering for the 8th SIDS meeting in Victoria, Seychelles, took the new step to set up a secretariat as they embark on the final stages of the joint procurement initiative.
“Mauritius is honoured to assume this important responsibility and we thank fellow SIDS countries and Madagascar for the confidence demonstrated in us to host the pooled drugs procurement secretariat,” said Hon Kailesh Jagutpal, Minister of Health and Wellness of Mauritius. “We will assume this duty with the care and rigour that it requires for the common good of all people and countries represented.”
Pooled procurement has been on the SIDS agenda since 2017 when the countries expressed commitment to implement the initiative.
“I congratulate Mauritius on the election as host for the secretariat. This is a win for all of us. Our unique position of SIDS in the African region is what brings us together and makes us stronger,” said Cabo Verde Minister of Health, Hon Filomena Gonçalves. “We will continue to play an important role in moving the agenda of pooled procurement forward and will work closely with our partners, including WHO.”
During the 25–27 March 2024 meeting, the ministers and government representatives also agreed to strengthen collective efforts and actions on health, including bolstering preparedness and response to health emergencies, strengthening health systems and putting in place measures to mitigate and adapt to the impacts of climate change, to which island nations are particularly vulnerable.
“As a collective we have come together to explore different ways of working so we can make our voices heard in all the important global arenas. Even if we don’t always have the capacity on our own, through SIDS we can do it. We may be small, but we can be big in our actions,” said Hon Peggy Vidot, Minister of Health of the Seychelles.
The meeting was the first for Guinea-Bissau, which has now become a full member of SIDS, and for Madagascar, which accepted the invitation to be part of the SIDS Network initiative and therefore part of pooled procurement efforts.
“This meeting will be remembered as a milestone. We’ve had fruitful discussions and made important decisions that will have an impact on SIDS and the rest of the region. At WHO, we will provide technical support to SIDS to ensure the implementation of the agreed-upon actions from this meeting,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, World Health Organization Regional Director for Africa.
The SIDS meeting in the African region serves as a forum for a collective voice for joint inputs into global SIDS events, including the upcoming Fourth International Conference on SIDS in Antigua and Barbuda, which will take place in late May 2024.
Rate of TB diagnosis, treatment in Africa increasing.
Brazzaville – About 70% of tuberculosis (TB) cases in the African region are now being diagnosed and treated, marking the highest case-detection rate in the region ever, thanks to concerted efforts by countries to address the threat of the disease.
Although the case detection rate has been on the rise since 2018, the region saw a significant increase between 2020 and 2022, rising from 60% to 70% of cases being detected, according to the World Health Organization (WHO) Global Tuberculosis Report 2023. There has also been a notable reduction in the region in the number of people with TB who miss diagnosis. An estimated 700 000 people missed diagnosis in 2022, a 10% reduction compared with 2021. To further rally efforts to end the disease through concerted global efforts to advance detection, diagnosis and treatment, World TB Day is being marked this year under the theme “Yes! We can end TB”.
In the African region a range of factors have helped boost TB diagnosis rates. During the COVID-19 pandemic, many countries-maintained TB notification services, ensuring that cases were detected and treated. In Nigeria, which has a huge TB burden, case notification nearly tripled over the past five years to 285 000 cases in 2022 from 106 000 cases in 2018. Improvement in the management of HIV infection, a significant driver of TB, has also bolstered TB detection rates in the region.
“More efforts are still needed to reduce the devastating impacts of this disease on families and communities. As WHO we continue working closely with governments to address the barriers to effective response and speed up the momentum to make TB history,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa.
The region, which accounts of 23% of TB cases and 33% of deaths globally, is making steady progress towards ending the disease.  For example, Cabo Verde, Eswatini and South Africa have achieved at least a 50% reduction in TB cases. The WHO End TB Strategy calls for countries to reduce TB deaths by 75% and cases by 50% by 2025 compared with the 2015 levels.
Across the region TB deaths fell by 38% and new cases declined by 23% in 2022 compared with 2015. High-burden TB countries have surpassed the 2025 milestone to lower TB deaths.
Despite the progress, further efforts are needed to meet the 2030 global End TB Strategy targets to cut TB deaths by 90% and cases by 80%. These include increased investments in TB control programmes. In 2022, in the African Region, the Global Plan to End TB 2018-2022 estimated that US$ 3.9 billion were required annually to achieve the targets, but only around US$ 890 million were mobilized for TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment. Domestic funding represented about 46% of total funding for TB (54% from international funding) in 2022.
Limited access to health services, inadequate health infrastructure, insufficient quality of care, inadequate human resources for health and inadequate social protection are also impeding progress to ending TB.
Globally TB continues to claim millions of lives annually. In the African region Africa, TB was the second leading cause of death from a single infectious agent, with nearly 2.5 million people falling ill and 424 000 lives lost in 2022.
African health ministers commit to end malaria deaths.
Yaoundé — Ministers of Health from African countries with the highest burden of malaria committed today to accelerated action to end deaths from the disease. They pledged to sustainably and equitably address the threat of malaria in the African region, which accounts for 95% of malaria deaths globally.
The Ministers, gathering in Yaoundé, Cameroon, signed a declaration committing to provide stronger leadership and increased domestic funding for malaria control programmes; to ensure further investment in data technology; to apply the latest technical guidance in malaria control and elimination; and to enhance malaria control efforts at the national and sub-national levels.
The Ministers further pledged to increase health sector investments to bolster infrastructure, personnel and programme implementation; to enhance multi-sectoral collaboration; and to build partnerships for funding, research and innovation. In signing the declaration, they expressed their “unwavering commitment to the accelerated reduction of malaria mortality” and “to hold each other and our countries accountable for the commitments outlined in this declaration.”
The Yaoundé conference, co-hosted by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the Government of Cameroon, gathered Ministers of Health, global malaria partners, funding agencies, scientists, civil society organizations and other principal malaria stakeholders.
The ministerial conference has four key aims: review progress and challenges in achieving the targets of the WHO global malaria strategy; discuss mitigation strategies and funding for malaria; agree on effective strategies and responses for accelerated malaria mortality reduction in Africa; and establish a roadmap for increased political commitment and societal engagement in malaria control, with a clear accountability mechanism.
“This declaration reflects our shared commitment as nations and partners to protect our people from the devastating consequences of malaria. We will work together to ensure that this commitment is translated into action and impact,” said Hon Manaouda Malachie, Minister for Health of Cameroon.
The African region is home to 11 countries that carry approximately 70% of the global burden of malaria: Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ghana, Mali, Mozambique, Niger, NIgeria, Sudan, Uganda and Tanzania. Progress against malaria has stalled in these high-burden African countries since 2017 due to factors including humanitarian crises, low access to and insufficient quality of health services, climate change, gender-related barriers, biological threats such as insecticide and drug resistance and global economic crises. Fragile health systems and critical gaps in data and surveillance have compounded the challenge.
Funding for malaria control globally is also inadequate. In 2022, US$ 4.1 billion – just over half of the needed budget – was available for malaria response.
Globally the number of cases in 2022 was significantly higher than before the COVID-19 pandemic, rising to 249 million from 233 million in 2019. In the same period, the African region saw an increase in cases from 218 million to 233 million. The region continues to shoulder the heaviest malaria burden, representing 94% of global malaria cases and 95% of global deaths, an estimated 580 000 deaths in 2022.
“Globally, the world has made significant progress against malaria in recent decades and yet, since 2017, that progress has stalled,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “The COVID-19 pandemic and long-standing threats like drug and insecticide resistance pushed us further off-track, with critical gaps in funding and access to tools to prevent, diagnose and treat malaria. With political leadership, country ownership and the commitment of a broad coalition of partners, we can change this story for families and communities across Africa.”
To help accelerate efforts to reduce the malaria burden, WHO and the RBM Partnership to End Malaria launched the “High burden to high impact” approach in 2018, a targeted effort to accelerate progress in countries hardest hit by malaria.
The declaration signed at today’s conference is aligned with the “High burden to high impact” approach, which is founded on four pillars: political will to reduce malaria deaths; strategic information to drive impact; better guidance, policies and strategies; and a coordinated national malaria response.
“Malaria continues to cause preventable deaths in children and great devastation to families across our region. We welcome today’s ministerial declaration, which demonstrates a strong political will to reduce the burden of this deadly disease,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “With renewed urgency and commitment, we can accelerate progress towards a future free of malaria.”
To put malaria progress back on track, WHO recommends robust commitment to malaria responses at all levels, particularly in high-burden countries; greater domestic and international funding; science and data-driven malaria responses; urgent action on the health impacts of climate change; harnessing research and innovation; as well as strong partnerships for coordinated responses. WHO is also calling attention to the need to address delays in malaria programme implementation.
OMS Cameroun
WHO Africa, UNICEF and Partners poised to advance implementation of Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative in countries.
Nairobi - In a concerted effort to strengthen maternal and child health services across Africa, the World Health Organization, in collaboration with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), convened a capacity-building workshop targeting healthcare professionals, policymakers, and stakeholders from ten countries (Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Nigeria, South Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe).
The workshop, held from 12 to 15 February 2024 in Nairobi, Kenya, focused on enhancing countries' capabilities to effectively implement the Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative (BFHI) as an integral component of maternal and newborn health quality care strategies.
The Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative, established by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), aims to protect and support breastfeeding and mother-baby bonding by ensuring that maternity facilities adhere to the Ten Steps to Successful Breastfeeding.
According to global evidence, implementing the BFHI significantly improves breastfeeding rates and better child health outcomes. For one thing, early initiation of breastfeeding has proven to reduce the risk of infant mortality and important in driving progress against global nutrition targets – against stunting, anaemia in women of reproductive age, low birth weight, childhood overweight and wasting. However, BFHI implementation is still below standard. In the African region, only 2 out of 42 countries have more than 50% of births in Baby-friendly facilities. This coupled with the plunging breastfeeding rates worldwide driven by aggressive marketing of infant formula to mothers.  It is against this backdrop that WHO and partners met in Kenya to accelerate countries' commitment and action to adapting and institutionalizing the Ten Steps to Successful Breastfeeding within national standards of care, strengthening country-led, comprehensive approaches to increased access to skilled breastfeeding counselling.
"This capacity-building workshop represents a significant milestone in our collective efforts to advance maternal and child health outcomes in Africa,” says Dr Abdourahmane Diallo, WHO representative from Kenya. He added that by strengthening healthcare professionals' capacity to promote breastfeeding and implement BFHI, WHO and Partners are laying a solid foundation for improving newborn survival, reducing childhood morbidity and mortality, and achieving sustainable development goals."
Key highlights from the capacity building workshop include plenary discussions featuring insights from policymakers on overcoming barriers and sustaining momentum in BFHI implementation. Countries enhanced their understanding of the ten steps to successful breastfeeding in health facilities providing maternity and newborn services and its integration into the health system as part of the quality of care.
The workshop also provided a platform for participants to exchange experiences, share best practices, and forge partnerships for collective action in advancing BFHI implementation across WHO AFRO countries.
Christiane Rudert, the Regional Advisor for UNICEF Eastern and Southern Africa, asserts that such capacity-building workshops play a crucial role in equipping healthcare practitioners and other stakeholders with the necessary tools to offer essential support to infants and mothers, particularly from vulnerable communities.
“Breastfeeding makes a world of difference to both mother and child. From birth to 6 months of age, feeding infants nothing but breastmilk guarantees them a food source that is uniquely adapted to their nutrient needs, while also being safe, clean, healthy and accessible, no matter where they live.  Breastfeeding provides essential benefits, including protection against infections, optimal growth, and emotional closeness between mother and baby. It’s a precious gift that contributes to the health and well-being of both infants and mothers. In the end the participating Countries developed action plans and took bold commitments to drive BFHI implementation at the national and subnational levels, with a focus on monitoring and evaluation to track progress and impact.
Speaking on behalf of the Ugandan team at the workshop, Laura Ahumuza Senior Nutritionist and coordinator of Maternal, Infant and Young child and Adolescent nutrition, MoH says Uganda is hoping to strengthen integration of BFHI implementation within the health sector with close collaboration with other sector.  This includes - nursing, midwifery, reproductive health, nutrition, and related sectors.
Meanwhile Olivia Timpo, from Ghana, stated that Ghana plans to embrace new approaches and verify health worker competences for knowledge and skill in handling and sustaining breastfeeding. ” We also want to engage stakeholders and use facilitation of processes to inspire quality and breastfeeding indicators.”
WHO and UNICEF launched the BFHI more than three decades ago to motivate managers and staff working in health facilities to provide maternity and newborn services through the implementation of the Ten Steps to Successful Breastfeeding. Over the years, WHO has revised the BFHI guideline to include relevant aspects of the International Code for Marketing Breast Milk Substitutes. The strategy also encapsulates key policies and procedures to be implemented in hospitals to promote and support breastfeeding.
Through such capacity strengthening workshop, WHO AFRO reaffirms its commitment to providing ongoing support, technical assistance, and resources to facilitate the effective implementation of BFHI across the region.
Nearly 10 000 children vaccinated as malaria vaccine rollout in Africa expands.
Brazzaville – Nearly 10 000 children in Burkina Faso and Cameroon have now received the RTS,S malaria vaccine since being introduced this year. A wider malaria vaccine rollout is underway this year in several African countries, with Cameroon being the first outside the malaria vaccine pilot programme to do so.
Cameroon launched the vaccine on 22 January 2024. It is being integrated into its national routine immunization programme in more than 500 public and private health facilities across 42 health districts in the country’s 10 regions.
Burkina Faso introduced the vaccine on 5 February, becoming the latest country in the region to kick off the immunization. The game-changing vaccine complements the existing range of malaria control measures to prevent the disease and lower its burden.
“Malaria is one of the major health challenges our region faces. The wider rollout of the malaria vaccine marks a significant milestone in advancing the fight against this deadly disease,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Director for Africa. “We’re committed to supporting countries to ensure that all eligible children are protected from the devastating impacts of this preventable illness.”
The vaccine rollout in the two countries mark the start of a major initiative by the WHO Regional Office for Africa’s Accelerated Malaria Vaccines Introduction and Rollout in Africa (AMVIRA).
AMVIRA was developed as a response to the planned introduction of the two malaria vaccines (RTS,S and R21) into the routine immunization schedules of 19 countries[1] the Africa region in 2024. Through AMVIRA, WHO in Africa will strengthen the provision of state-of-the-art support to countries in their efforts to effectively and efficiently introduce and rollout malaria vaccines. The initiative also enhances coordination with partners, UNICEF, GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance, and other partners.
In support of countries to ensure smooth introduction, community understanding and acceptance, and strengthened logistics, WHO has deployed 69 experts in immunization, data science and communication, across all 10 regions in Cameroon, as well as in Burkina Faso.
WHO is working with countries to set up comprehensive preparations such as national vaccination policy and guidelines, integrating the new vaccine into the delivery schedule of other vaccines and health interventions, developing an operational roll out plan, training of healthcare workers, investing in infrastructure, technical capacity, vaccine storage, community engagement and demand generation, and ensuring formative supervision, monitoring and evaluation of the process to ensure quality vaccine delivery.
As the malaria vaccine rollout extends to all eligible countries, WHO will continue to ensure that experts are deployed where needed, implement robust monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to track progress, identify challenges and facilitate timely interventions where required. The effective strategies that were witnessed in Cameroon and Burkina Faso are being documented and will be shared with other countries as they prepare for and launch the vaccines.
Malaria burden is the highest on the African continent, which accounted for approximately 94% of global malaria cases and 95% of related deaths in 2022. There were 249 million malaria cases globally in 2022, leading to 608 000 deaths. Of these deaths, 77% were children under 5 years of age, mostly in Africa.
[1] Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, DRC, Ghana, Kenya, Liberia, Malawi, Niger, Sierra Leone, Uganda, Central African Republic, Chad, Cote d’Ivoire, Guinea, Mozambique, Nigeria and South Sudan
Cameroon kicks off malaria vaccine rollout.
Yaoundé – Cameroon today launched the RTS,S malaria vaccine into its routine national immunization services, becoming the first country to do so outside the malaria vaccine pilot programme that was carried out in Ghana, Kenya and Malawi. The introduction comes as efforts gather pace to scale up vaccination against the disease in high risk areas in Africa.
The vaccine is being rolled out across 42 health districts in the country’s 10 regions in public and private health facilities. The launch comes after Cameroon received 331 200 doses of the vaccine in November 2023. More doses are expected in coming weeks.
“The vaccine is an additional tool for malaria control. It has been chosen by the country based on its pre-qualification, ensuring guaranteed quality, efficacy and safety for inclusion in the vaccination programme,” said Dr Shalom Ndoula, Permanent Secretary of the Expanded Programme on Immunization in Cameroon. “It will specifically target all children aged six months as of 31 December 2023.”
In preparation for the launch, World Health Organization (WHO) and other partners including Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, UNICEF, Africa Centre for Disease Control and Prevention and the Clinton Health Access Initiative supported the national health authorities to strengthen key vaccine introduction measures. For an effective vaccine introduction, it is essential that countries put in place comprehensive preparations that include adopting the national vaccination policy and guidelines, integrating the new vaccine into the delivery schedule of other vaccines and health interventions, developing an operational roll out plan, training of healthcare workers, investing in infrastructure, technical capacity, vaccine storage, community engagement and demand generation, and ensuring formative supervision, monitoring and evaluation of the process to ensure quality vaccine delivery.
“The launch of the malaria vaccine marks a significant step in the prevention and control of the disease, especially in protecting children against severe disease and death,” said Dr Phanuel Habimana, WHO Representative in Cameroon. “We’re committed to supporting the national health authorities to ensure an effective rollout of the malaria vaccine together with scale up of other malaria control measures.”
Cameroon is among the 11 countries most affected by the disease globally. The country recorded more than 3 million cases and over 3800 deaths in 2021. Cameroon has made the fight against malaria one of the priorities of its National Health Development Plan. With the support of partners, malaria control and prevention efforts over the years have helped to progressively lower the burden of the disease in the country.
“I chose to vaccinate my twins because I've seen how harmful malaria can be,” said Helene, whose twin children were the first to receive the malaria vaccine. “I'm committed to ensuring that my children get all the four doses of the vaccine and I'll take other steps like making sure they sleep under mosquito nets.”
Since 2019, Ghana, Kenya and Malawi have been administering the RTS,S vaccine in a four-dose schedule to children from around 5 months of age in selected districts as part of the pilot programme, known as the Malaria Vaccine Implementation Programme (MVIP). More than 2 million children have been reached with the malaria vaccine in the three African countries through MVIP with over 8 million doses administered – resulting in a remarkable 13% drop in all-cause mortality in children age-eligible to receive the vaccine, and substantial reductions in severe malaria illness and hospitalizations.
Nine African countries are poised to launch the malaria vaccine this year. In addition to Cameroon, Benin, Burkina Faso and Liberia have received the vaccine and are finalizing vaccine rollout plans.
WHO, Gavi, UNICEF and other partners are working closely with the African countries that are introducing the malaria vaccine to ensure delivery and successful rollout of the malaria vaccine.
Malaria burden is the highest on the African continent, which accounted for approximately 94% of global malaria cases and 95% of related deaths in 2022. There were 249 million malaria cases globally in 2022, leading to 608 000 deaths. Of these deaths, 77% were children under 5 years of age, mostly in Africa.
OMS Cameroun
WHO Africa, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation pursue collaboration to leverage data analytics to fight diseases.
Brazzaville - The World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Office for Africa and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF) have committed to strengthening collaboration towards the use of data analytics in the fight against diseases in the African region.
The commitment was made during a technical visit to the WHO Africa office in Brazzaville, Congo by a delegation from BMGF led by Jennifer Gardy, Deputy Director, Surveillance, Data, and Epidemiology from 8 to 10 January 2024.
The visit provided a platform for the delegation to understand how the WHO Regional Office for Africa’s Precision Public Health Metrics (PPHM) programme is strengthening health and disease modelling in Africa.
The PPHM unit was set up as a cross-cutting team within the Universal Health Coverage Communicable and Noncommunicable Diseases (UCN) Cluster in WHO Africa to support all programme areas with data analytics to control, eradicate and eliminate diseases in the African region.
“Through precision public health, we are poised to deploy analytics to drive evidence and investments for public health interventions. We welcome the opportunity to build synergies with BMFG and other partners in this effort to leverage data in the fight against diseases,” says Dr Matshidiso Moeti, the WHO Regional Director for Africa.
Discussions during the engagement centered on the alignment between the vision and strategies of the UCN cluster and the BMGF, and how this can inform the work of the PPHM programme as it works to support and enhance the use of data analytics at both regional and country level.
Furthermore, the WHO Africa Regional Office and BMFG express commitment to continue to work closely, through the UCN Cluster and PPHM, to support the many areas identified for collaboration, with an initial focus on the eradication of malaria in the region.
“We recognize the need to leverage data for public health decision-making. We are looking forward to building synergies with the WHO Africa Regional Office to support countries in the region in their efforts to use data-informed solutions to fight disease,” says Jennifer Gardy.
PPH was established as a special strategic initiative to deepen the precision public health for Africa (PPH4Africa) strategic initiative, advancing the deployment of analytics towards health systems strengthening and response. This vision is aligned with ongoing efforts to strengthen capacity on epidemiological modelling for public health decision-making in sub-Saharan Africa, already supported by BMFG.
WHO Certifies Cabo Verde as Malaria-Free, Marking a Historic Milestone in the Fight Against Malaria.
A total of 43 countries and 1 territory have now been certified as malaria-free
Cabo Verde – The World Health Organization (WHO) has certified Cabo Verde as a malaria-free country, marking a significant achievement in global health. With this announcement, Cabo Verde joins the ranks of 43 countries and 1 territory that WHO has awarded this certification.
Cabo Verde is the third country to be certified in the WHO African region, joining Mauritius and Algeria which were certified in 1973 and 2019 respectively. Malaria burden is the highest on the African continent, which accounted for approximately 95% of global malaria cases and 96% of related deaths in 2021.
Certification of malaria elimination will drive positive development on many fronts for Cabo Verde.  Systems and structures built for malaria elimination have strengthened the health system and will be used to fight other mosquito-borne diseases such as dengue fever. Travellers from non-malaria endemic regions can now travel to the islands of Cabo Verde without fear of local malaria infections and the potential inconvenience of preventive treatment measures. This has the potential to attract more visitors and boost socio-economic activities in a country where tourism accounts for approximately 25 per cent of GDP.
Frequently asked questionsCertification of Cabo Verde as eliminating malaria
“I salute the government and people of Cabo Verde for their unwavering commitment and resilience in their journey to eliminating malaria,”
said WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.
“WHO’s certification of Cabo Verde being malaria-free is testament to the power of strategic public health planning, collaboration, and sustained effort to protect and promote health. Cabo Verde's success is the latest in the global fight against malaria, and gives us hope that with existing tools, as well as new ones including vaccines, we can dare to dream of a malaria-free world.”
Certification of malaria elimination is the official recognition by WHO of a country’s malaria-free status. The certification is granted when a country has shown – with rigorous, credible evidence – that the chain of indigenous malaria transmission by Anopheles mosquitoes has been interrupted nationwide for at least the past three consecutive years.  A country must also demonstrate the capacity to prevent the re-establishment of transmission.
“The certification as a malaria-free country has a huge impact, and it's taken a long time to get to this point. In terms of the country's external image, this is very good, both for tourism and for everyone else. The challenge that Cabo Verde has overcome in the health system is being recognised”,
said the Cabo Verde´s Prime Minister, Ulisses Correia e Silva.
Cabo Verde, an archipelago of 10 islands in the Central Atlantic Ocean, has faced significant malaria challenges. Before the 1950s, all islands were affected by malaria. Severe epidemics were regular occurrences in the most densely populated areas until targeted interventions were implemented. Through the targeted use of insecticide spraying, the country eliminated malaria twice: in 1967 and 1983. However, subsequent lapses in vector control led to a return of the disease. Since the last peak of malaria cases in the late 1980s, malaria in Cabo Verde has been confined to two islands: Santiago and Boa Vista, which have now both been malaria-free since 2017.
“Cabo Verde’s achievement is a beacon of hope for the African Region and beyond. It demonstrates that with strong political will, effective policies, community engagement and multisectoral collaboration, malaria elimination is an achievable goal,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “The attainment of this milestone by Cabo Verde is an inspiring example for other nations to follow.”
Cabo Verde's journey to malaria elimination has been long and received a boost with the inclusion of this objective in its national health policy in 2007. A strategic malaria plan from 2009 to 2013 laid the groundwork for success, focusing on expanded diagnosis, early and effective treatment, and the reporting and investigating all cases. To stem the tide of imported cases from mainland Africa, diagnosis and treatment were provided free of charge to international travellers and migrants.
In 2017 the country turned an outbreak into an opportunity. Cabo Verde identified problems and made improvements, leading to zero indigenous cases for three consecutive years.
During the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the country safeguarded progress; efforts focused on improving the quality and sustainability of vector control and malaria diagnosis, strengthening malaria surveillance - especially at ports, airports, in the capital city and areas with a risk of malaria re-establishment.
Collaboration between the Ministry of Health and various government departments focused on the environment, agriculture, transportation, tourism, and more, played a pivotal role in Cabo Verde's success. The inter-ministerial commission for vector control, chaired by the Prime Minister was key to elimination. The collaborative effort and the commitment of community-based organizations and NGOs demonstrate the importance of a holistic approach to public health.
As Cabo Verde celebrates this monumental achievement, the global community commends its leaders, healthcare professionals, and citizens for their dedication to eliminating malaria and creating a healthier future for all.
WHO malaria-free certification
The final decision on awarding a malaria-free certification rests with the WHO Director-General, based on a recommendation by the independent Technical Advisory Group on Malaria Elimination and Certification. For more on WHO’s malaria-free certification process, visit this link.
Partner quotes:
“This is an extraordinary accomplishment, a beacon of hope at a time when climate change threatens to slow down our progress in the global fight against malaria. What’s now crucial is that we do not lower our guard, and help Cape Verde sustain this achievement and prevent reintroduction of malaria. With this aim in mind, we will continue to fund vector control interventions and ensure quality case management and disease surveillance through strengthening health systems for yet another three years.”
Peter Sands, Executive Director, Global Fund
"Cabo Verde has proven that with the right tools, access to care, improved case management and surveillance, sustained investment, and engagement across sectors, countries in Africa can achieve dramatic progress against malaria – and even eliminate it entirely. As the malaria community celebrates this victory, let it also serve as a call to action for urgent, sustained efforts and collaboration in the pursuit of malaria eradication and a world where no one suffers from this disease again.”
Philip Welkhoff, Director, Malaria Program, The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
“Cabo Verde's achievement is a testament to the perseverance of its people and health systems, and demonstrates that with strategic planning, sustained investment, community engagement, and widescale implementation of preventative measures, the eradication of malaria is within reach. This milestone is not only a victory for Cabo Verde, but also for the global community as we strive to eliminate malaria worldwide. Yet, with global cases now 16 million higher than before the pandemic, we must not waiver in our commitment to invest in, implement, and innovate new strategies and tools.”
Dr Michael Adekunle Charles, CEO, RBM Partnership to End Malaria
“Cabo Verde’s success in malaria elimination is an inspiration for the Asia Pacific Region where several countries are also on the cusp of elimination. This achievement is a living example which demonstrates what remains possible in public health, even amidst the challenging landscape of today. Our heartfelt congratulations to our friends in this archipelago of the Central Atlantic for this momentous achievement; we look forward to countries in Asia Pacific joining them in malaria free status in the near future.”
Dr Sarthak Das, CEO, Asia Pacific Leaders Malaria Alliance
