Fourteen African countries, key partners unite to provide critical resources for health in WHO’s first-ever Investment Round  .
Brazzaville — In an unprecedented show of unity in support of the World Health Organization, 14 African countries and many partners pledged over US$ 45 million to the WHO Investment Round, a three-month-old initiative aimed at generating sustainable financing for the organization at the centre of the global health architecture.
The commitments were made during the World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Committee for Africa, with Member States underscoring the importance of investing in global health and ensuring a strong WHO.
“I thank our African Region Member States for actively supporting WHO’s first Investment Round to mobilize predictable and flexible resources needed for our core work over the next four years,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “Full, sustainable funding will enable WHO to support countries better in their work to build healthier, more resilient, and more prosperous populations.”
The countries and partners came together for the historic event aimed at sustainably funding WHO and thus enabling it to more effectively fulfil its mandate and advance key objectives to promote, provide and protect health and well-being for all. The countries included Botswana, Cabo Verde, Chad, Congo, Ethiopia, Mauritius, Namibia, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, Seychelles, South Africa, Tanzania and The Gambia.
Many partners joined Members States in making commitments of support to WHO and committing to providing pledges later in the year, including Helmsley Charitable Trust, World Diabetes Foundation, Roche, Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, African Development Bank and the WHO Foundation.
“A strong, predictable and sustainably financed WHO is essential for our region and the world to meet the multiple health threats we face; and support the prevention of disease based on the vast evidence at our disposal,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. “Every pledge and every partnership counts. Together, we can achieve a future where health and well-being are accessible to all.”
The WHO Investment Round will continue in the coming months and feature key pledging moments around the world. Information can be found here:  https://www.who.int/about/funding/invest-in-who/investment-round
With a fully and sustainably funded operating budget over the next four years, WHO will be better able to tackle emergencies and outbreaks that threaten lives and jeopardize global health security; reduce the burden of both infectious and noncommunicable diseases; and continue working to improve the health and well-being of everyone, especially the most vulnerable.
