Experts commit to step up immunization programme in Central Africa.
Kinshasa – At their 2024 meeting in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of Congo from 9 to 12 September, Essential Programme on Immunization (EPI) managers from Central African countries committed to consolidate gains made by the EPI in its 50 years of existence.
The meeting, which brought together EPI Managers from Angola, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Sao Tome and Principe was aimed at celebrating the achievements of EPI in the last 50 year of saving lives from vaccine preventable diseases.
The Secretary General of from the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s Ministry of Health, Dr Sylvain Yuma commended stakeholders in EPI for the achievements over the years and highlighted the important role of collaboration among communities, healthcare workers and other actors in the success of the program.
“This celebration is an opportunity to recognize the decisive contribution of health workers at all levels, community health workers, political and community leaders in the implementation of immunization programmes, and in the successes that we are going to celebrate this evening. Without community involvement, it would not have been possible to combat vaccine hesitancy, to vaccinate hard-to-reach populations, and to maintain the provision of immunization services during humanitarian crises and, in conflict zones,” said Dr Sylvain Yuma.
Through EPI, Central African countries have made progress in the fight against vaccine preventable diseases. The sub region has eradicated wild poliovirus and 8 out of 10 countries have achieved maternal and neonatal tetanus elimination.
However, since 2019, the immunization coverage in the Central African sub-region has stalled due to the impact of the COVID19 pandemic and other factors, with over 13 million zero-dose and under-immunized children being recorded from 2019 to 2023. These gaps have left children vulnerable to vaccine preventable diseases, with the sub region recording 9280 cases and 144 deaths from measles outbreaks between January and July 2024.
Therefore, the meeting afforded the directors an opportunity to review status of immunization and discussed ways of strategizing to improve coverage and the gains made by EPI in Central Africa.
“Catching up with the vaccination of millions of children who missed all or part of the vaccines in the national schedule because of the COVID-19 pandemic should be considered as a top priority for EPI in the African region. Successful implementation of the Big Catch-Up Initiative is our only chance of rapidly reducing the immunity gap inherited from the pandemic,” said Dr Matsidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa.
Some of the outcomes of the meeting include the need to address gender and access gaps in immunization programming and promote equitable access to vaccines and leave no one vulnerable to vaccine preventable diseases.
Furthermore, the EPI Managers resolved to strengthen coordination among countries and with partners to facilitate knowledge sharing and unlock funding opportunities to improve immunization service delivery across the sub region.
“Vaccines not only improve public health, but also school performance, household income and economic growth. Every dollar invested in immunization brings a return of US$ 48. It is possible to save more lives through vaccination. UNICEF reiterates its commitment to guarantee the right to immunization and health for every child and every population in West and Central Africa,” said Mr Gilles Fagninou, UNICEF Regional Director for West and Central Africa.
The EPI was launched in 1974 by the World Health Organization, to establish equal access to life-saving vaccination for children across all geographical locations and socioeconomic status. It is estimated that vaccination has accounted for 40% of the observed decline in global infant mortality, and 52% in the African region.  The establishment of Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, in 2000 gave new impetus to EPI by increasing access to sustainable resources to fund immunisation services, strengthening health systems, and supporting the introduction of new vaccines, particularly in low-income countries like most Central African countries.
“This year, we have seen two malaria vaccines being introduced, especially in Africa. I want to recognize the great contribution of African communities and scientists to successful to the process that led to successful rollout of these vaccine. Reaching one billion children with lifesaving vaccines over the next decade is a goal that I am convinced we will achieve,” said Dr Thabani Maphosa, Chief Country Delivery Officer at Gavi.
