WHO Steps Up Cross-Regional Efforts for Sudan’s Humanitarian Emergency.
Adre – As millions flee war and hunger in Sudan, senior leadership from WHO’s Africa and Eastern Mediterranean Regions converged in Chad, which hosts the largest number of Sudanese refugees, to assess the urgent health needs of people impacted by this complex and deteriorating humanitarian crisis.
The mission aims to optimize WHO operations in Chad, Sudan, and the offices of the African Region (AFRO) and the Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMRO) to serve affected communities with crucial medical care and scale up cross-border operations for humanitarian assistance into the Darfur states of Sudan.
“As WHO’s Representative for Sudan, it is difficult to see this level of suffering among the refugees. They shared stories of violence, loss, and hunger. With the health system severely degraded – all 241 health facilities in Central Darfur have sustained damage – disease spreading, and famine looming, it is increasingly challenging to meet the soaring health needs. If we don’t act with urgency, we will see higher morbidity, mortality, and transgenerational impact of the current conflict,” said Dr. Shible Sahbani.
Hunger is rising at devastating rates. The Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC), the global authority on famine, says Sudan is facing the worst levels of acute food insecurity ever recorded by the IPC in the country. In the last six months, the number of people facing high levels of acute food insecurity has increased by 45% from 17.7 million to 25.6 million.
WHO’s cross-regional priorities include scaling up cross-border operations to Sudan, particularly into Darfur, which has been largely cut off from humanitarian assistance.  But lack of access imposed by parties to the conflict and reduced resources – only 18% of the Sudan Humanitarian Response has been funded - severely constrains the response. Opening the Adre border crossing between Chad and Sudan to allow humanitarian supplies in would be lifesaving.
WHO’s Representative in Chad, Dr. Anya Blanche, said: “The people of Chad have been incredibly hospitable and offered food, water, and shelter for the refugees coming in, but the needs are overwhelming. Our priority is to create integrated health systems for refugees and host populations that not only address immediate medical needs, but also develop Chad’s healthcare capacity in the long run so the future of the people is not dependent on aid.”
The small town of Adre in Eastern Chad, originally home to 40 000 people, has seen a sixfold increase in its population. Over 600 000 Sudanese and 180 000 Chadian returnees have arrived in Adre since the beginning of the conflict in April 2023.
Most refugees have survived multiple displacements as the violence that started in Khartoum escalated to different parts of Sudan. They have crossed the border with gunshot wounds, having survived rape and sexual violence, and walked for days without sufficient food for months.
In mid-April, marking one year to the conflict, the number of people displaced by conflict was nearly 8.7 million. In three months alone, this has increased by over 45%, with 12.7 million people estimated to be displaced today.  Over 10 million people are displaced within Sudan, while 2 million have sought refuge into six neighbouring countries.
Dr. Thierno Baldé, Coordinator for WHO Regional Emergency Hub for West and Central Africa, said: “We have seen the suffering of the people here. They have nothing and are exposed to many diseases, including epidemic-prone diseases. Humanitarian aid actors are present, but funding is minimal. At WHO, we are working collectively between the two regions to make our operations as resource-efficient as possible.
With the seasonal rains here, minimal shelter, and dismal living conditions, there are heightened fears of disease outbreaks such as malaria and cholera, that could lead to yet another layer of suffering.
Regional Emergency Director for EMRO, Dr. Richard Brennan, stressed the need for global solidarity and attention. “This dynamic and catastrophic crisis is getting very little attention by the international community. We can do more, and we certainly need to do more. Peace, access and resources are vital to protect the lives and livelihoods of the Sudanese people.”
